

===== Page 1 =====

Thermodynamic and kinetic investigation of a technical grade
manganese-iron binary oxide for thermochemical energy storage
Michael Wokon a,⇑, Tina Block b, Sven Nicolai c, Marc Linder d, Martin Schmücker b
a German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.), Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, Linder Höhe, 51147 Cologne, Germany
b German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.), Institute of Materials Research, Linder Höhe, 51147 Cologne, Germany
c VITO – Flemish Institute for Technological Research NV, Boeretang 200, 2400 Mol, Belgium
d German Aerospace Center (DLR e.V.), Institute of Engineering Thermodynamics, Pfaffenwaldring 38-40, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 27 January 2017
Received in revised form 1 May 2017
Accepted 12 May 2017
Keywords:
Thermochemical energy storage
Redox reaction
Manganese-iron oxide
Thermodynamic equilibrium
Thermal hysteresis
Gas-solid reaction kinetics
a b s t r a c t
Thermochemical energy storage (TCS) based on gas-solid reactions constitutes a promising concept to
exploit reaction enthalpies for thermal energy storage. This concept facilitates the development of efﬁ-
cient storage solutions with higher energy densities compared to widely investigated sensible and latent
thermal energy storage systems. Multivalent metal oxides are capable of undergoing a reversible redox
reaction at high temperatures, which is why those storage materials are considered particularly suitable
for the operating temperature range of concentrated solar power plants with central receiver systems to
increase the total plant efﬁciency and ensure dispatchability of electricity.
In the scope of this work a granular manganese-iron oxide with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3 has been
selected as a potentially suitable storage material, which is non-toxic, abundant and economical. For this
reason a preparation route from technical grade raw materials has been chosen. The reversible redox
reaction is investigated with respect to the thermodynamic and kinetic characteristics by means of simul-
taneous thermal analysis in dynamic and isothermal series of measurements. Those revealed that the
observed presence of a strong divergence of the reactive temperature range from the actual thermody-
namic equilibrium can mainly be attributed to kinetic limitations. Expressions for the effective reaction
rates are deduced from experimental data for the reduction and oxidation step, describing the depen-
dence of the reaction rate on temperature and oxygen partial pressure, respectively. The expressions
are valid for the temperature ranges in proximity to the equilibrium, which are relevant for the targeted
operating conditions of the storage reactor in air. The storage material provides good cycling stability in
terms of reversibility and widely maintained reactivity throughout 100 redox cycles in air. Future work
comprises material modiﬁcations, which are expected to further enhance the mechanical stability of the
particles. Overall, the manganese-iron oxide of the chosen composition exhibits a redox reactivity prac-
tical for regenerator-type storage systems combining a high temperature TCS zone and a lower temper-
ature non-reactive zone merely used for sensible thermal energy storage.
 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
The development of sustainable energy systems based on
renewable energy sources is important to decrease the dependence
on fossil fuels and reduce CO2 emissions. Concentrated solar power
(CSP) plants constitute a promising alternative technology for elec-
tricity generation in regions with high solar irradiation (Pfenninger
et al., 2014). The integration of a high temperature thermal energy
storage (TES) system into a CSP plant is one of the most important
aspects, since it increases the plant’s dispatchability and efﬁciency
of the electricity generation. The storage of thermal energy on a
large scale allows to mitigate short ﬂuctuations in solar irradiation,
bridge short-term deﬁciencies during cloud passage and extend
electricity production into the nighttime hours (Liu et al., 2016).
In general, research on the identiﬁcation and improvement of
materials as well as on the design of reactor concepts for thermo-
chemical energy storage (TCS) is still at an early stage (Pardo et al.,
2014). Current investigations for high temperature storage applica-
tions from 600 C up to even 1100 C are focused on redox
cycles employing multivalent metal oxides, which have the poten-
tial to undergo reversible redox reactions to store thermal energy
in form of the reaction enthalpy (DRH) according to the following
pathway:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.05.045
0038-092X/ 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail address: michael.wokon@dlr.de (M. Wokon).
Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Solar Energy
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/solener


===== Page 2 =====

Charging :
2 MexOyðsÞ þ DRH ! 2 MexOy1ðsÞ þ O2ðgÞ
ð1Þ
Discharging :
2 MexOy1ðsÞ þ O2ðgÞ ! 2 MexOyðsÞ þ DRH
ð2Þ
Some metal oxides possess the intrinsic advantage to react
reversibly with oxygen (O2) at high temperatures. Hence, the con-
cept provides the possibility to utilize ambient air simultaneously
as carrier of the reaction gas O2 and heat transfer ﬂuid (HTF). This
approach facilitates a direct contact heat transfer between the gas
(air) and the solid storage material (metal oxide). An additional
high temperature heat exchanger is therefore not necessary.
The thermal charging process is achieved by means of the
endothermic reduction step driven by solar thermal energy under
the release of O2 (1), which process can be either performed
directly in the solar central receiver or indirectly in a TCS reactor
using the HTF air. The reduction step is accompanied by the advan-
tage of a facile separation of the gaseous product from the reduced
solid in order to prevent re-oxidation for the period of storage. The
recombination of the reduced metal oxide and O2 (from ambient
air) leads to the exothermic oxidation step, representing the ther-
mal discharging process by the complete recovery of thermal
energy via the release of the heat of reaction (2). This storage con-
cept based on metal oxides offers process-technological advan-
tages compared to the use of other TCS materials, since there is
no necessity for intermediate storage of the reactant gas. Conse-
quently, a storage reactor could potentially be implemented into
a CSP plant in the form of an open-loop system. The use of air as
HTF allows to work with high HTF temperatures up to and even
beyond 1000 C, which renders TCS reactors based on metal oxides
speciﬁcally interesting for solar tower CSP plants with a future
generation of central receiver technology (Ávila-Marín, 2011; Ho,
2017).
The high degree of thermal energy stored as sensible heat due
to the elevated working temperatures – temperatures above the
reduction temperature in the charging stage – can be regarded as
one of the most important intrinsic aspects and also challenges
of high temperature TCS based on metal oxides. On this account
hybrid storage concepts using sensible and thermochemical energy
storage simultaneously in one single storage unit have been sug-
gested to enhance the overall energy storage density. In view of a
packed bed storage unit, this concept would facilitate an increase
in volumetric and gravimetric energy storage densities of the solid
inventory due to a high temperature TCS zone as well as cost sav-
ings due to a low temperature non-reacting cooling section
employing low cost inert materials as sensible storage media
(Ströhle et al., 2016). As indicated in Fig. 1, the reactive material
would only be positioned in the upper part of the packed bed stor-
age, where operating conditions during charging allow the reduc-
tion to take place. The operating method is comparable to high
temperature regenerator-type storage systems, so called passive
dual media TES systems with gaseous heat transfer medium and
solid storage medium. During the charging stage hot air from the
solar ﬁeld enters the storage at the top and ﬂows downward, form-
ing a characteristic transient temperature proﬁle along the axis of
the solid inventory (Fig. 1(a)). The direction of the ﬂow is subse-
quently reversed in the discharging stage, cold air entering at the
bottom of the storage (Fig. 1(b)). In this way an axial thermal strat-
iﬁcation inside the packed bed can be maintained, when thermal
energy
is
transferred
to
and
extracted
from
the
storage
(Zanganeh et al., 2012; Zunft et al., 2011).
In this work, we performed the examinations with regard to the
envisaged technical application of a hybrid regenerator-type stor-
age with direct contact heat transfer between the HTF and the solid
inventory in the form of a packed bed conﬁguration. Therefore, a
Nomenclature
Abbreviations
B
cubic bixbyite phase (Mn,Fe)2O3
CLOU
chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling
CSP
concentrated solar power
DSC
differential scanning calorimetry
g
gaseous
HTF
heat transfer ﬂuid
N2
nitrogen
O2
oxygen
redox reaction reduction-oxidation reaction
s
solid
S
cubic spinel phase b-(Mn,Fe)3O4
SEM
scanning electron microscopy
STA
simultaneous thermal analysis
T
tetragonal spinel phase a-(Mn,Fe)3O4
TCS
thermochemical energy storage
TES
thermal energy storage
TGA
thermogravimetric analysis
XRD
X-ray diffraction
XRF
X-ray ﬂuorescence
Symbols
A
pre-exponential factor (1/s)
b
heating rate or cooling rate (K/min)
DRH
molar reaction enthalpy (kJ/mol)
DRh
speciﬁc reaction enthalpy (kJ/kg)
DRG
Gibbs free energy of reaction (kJ/mol)
DRS
molar reaction entropy (J/(molK))
Ea
activation energy (kJ/mol)
f(X)
reaction model, reaction mechanism (–)
g(X)
integral form of the reaction model (–)
h(pO2, pO2,eq) pressure-dependent function, pressure term (–)
k(T)
rate constant (1/s)
Keq
equilibrium constant (–)
m
mass (g)
m
exponent of pressure term (–)
n
parameter of reaction model (–)
mO2
stoichiometric coefﬁcient of oxygen (–)
pambient
atmospheric pressure (Pa)
pO2
oxygen partial pressure (Pa)
pO2,eq
oxygen partial pressure at equilibrium (Pa)
t
time (s)
t0
delay period (s)
T
temperature (K)
X
reaction conversion (g/g)
yO2
molar fraction of oxygen (–)
Constants
R
molar gas constant (J/(molK))
Subscripts
c
charging
d
discharging
eq
equilibrium
Ox
oxidation
Red
reduction
472
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 3 =====

detailed knowledge of the reactive temperature ranges, which can
be covered by the redox reaction to exploit the heat of reaction in
addition to the sensible heat, is crucial for this speciﬁc case of
application. This usable temperature range is mainly predeter-
mined by the material characteristics, such as the equilibrium
position, temperature- and pressure-dependent reaction rates as
well as the possible occurrence of kinetic limitations. Even though
it is important to keep in mind, that thermodynamic and kinetic
material characteristics will be further superimposed with heat
and mass transfer phenomena in an actual working storage reactor,
these material speciﬁc investigations form the basis for any further
analysis.
Metal oxide storage materials – as well as TCS materials in gen-
eral – are assessed and selected according to certain material
requirements, such as high speciﬁc reaction enthalpies implicating
a high speciﬁc storage capacity, chemical reversibility, high reac-
tion rates and long-term cycling stability (Block and Schmücker,
2016; Schaube et al., 2012; Wentworth and Chen, 1976). It is par-
ticularly important, that the redox reactions are thermodynami-
cally favored at the relevant temperature and pressure levels
suitable for storage operation (dependent on process parameters).
Potential redox reactions for TCS application could be narrowed
down to the redox couples BaO2/BaO, Co3O4/CoO, Mn2O3/Mn3O4
and CuO/Cu2O in the temperature range of 700–1100 C at ambient
pressure (Agraﬁotis et al., 2014, 2016; André et al., 2016; Block and
Schmücker, 2016; Wong, 2011; Wong et al., 2010). Pure man-
ganese oxide, exhibiting an energy density of 202 J/g Mn2O3,
has been suggested as a promising TCS material by several authors,
as it is nonhazardous, abundant in nature and low-priced in con-
trast to other metal oxides such as cobalt oxide (Carrillo et al.,
2014; Wong, 2011). On the one hand, the equilibrium temperature
of about 902 C in air (Barin and Platzki, 1995) is in the appropriate
temperature range for the envisaged application. On the other
hand, the redox reaction of Mn2O3/Mn3O4 exhibits a pronounced
thermal hysteresis, decoupling the forward and reverse reaction,
which is characteristic for manganese oxide (Carrillo et al., 2015).
Moreover, pure manganese oxide suffers severely from slow re-
oxidation kinetics, spiraling downward upon cycling, which illus-
trates the poor cyclability of the material (Block and Schmücker,
2016; Carrillo et al., 2014; Wong, 2011).
In recent studies some binary metal oxides offered improved
material properties in comparison to pure oxides, essentially per-
taining to enhanced reaction rates and increased microstructural
stability, which in turn potentially provokes increased long-term
cycling stability (Block and Schmücker, 2016; Carrillo et al.,
2015; Wong, 2011). In this way, upon the incorporation of iron
as secondary cations into manganese oxide signiﬁcantly higher
re-oxidation rates, better long-term cycling stability as well as a
narrowed thermal hysteresis of the redox couple Mn2O3/Mn3O4
have been reported, overall maintaining the energy storage density
(Block and Schmücker, 2016; Carrillo et al., 2015, 2016b; Wong,
2011). On this account manganese-iron oxide is in the focus of
the current work. Based on thermal analysis Carrillo et al. sug-
gested a molar ratio Fe/Mn of 1:4 with a reduction onset temper-
ature of 995 C and an enthalpy of 219 J/g measured at a heating
rate of 5 K/min in air (Carrillo et al., 2015). Block and Schmücker
highlighted a molar ratio Fe/Mn of 1:2 with a reduction onset tem-
perature of 999 C and an enthalpy of 233 J/g measured at a heat-
ing
rate
of
10 K/min
in
air
(Block
and
Schmücker,
2016).
Remarkably, re-oxidation rates of such Fe-doped manganese oxi-
des can be signiﬁcantly increased in comparison to the correspond-
ing transition from pure Mn3O4 to Mn2O3. For fundamental
examinations in this work a manganese-iron oxide with a Fe/Mn
molar ratio of 1:3 has been selected as a potentially suitable stor-
age material. A spray-dried material of the same composition has
previously been analyzed regarding oxygen carrier properties in
the research ﬁeld of chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling,
shortly referred to as CLOU hereinafter (Azimi et al., 2013). Diverse
literature studies have concentrated on the thermodynamic assess-
ment of the manganese oxide – iron oxide system, which comprise
experimental determinations of the phase evolution as well as cal-
culations of the prevailing phase equilibria (Crum et al., 2009;
Kjellqvist and Selleby, 2010; Wickham, 1969). The corresponding
phase diagrams for air indicate the presence of the cubic bixbyite
phase (Mn,Fe)2O3 (B) at low temperatures (e.g. 750 C) and the
cubic spinel phase b-(Mn,Fe)3O4 (S) at high temperatures (e.g.
1060 C) for the selected composition in this work. Consequently,
the following redox reaction is expected, when the temperature
is increased:
6 ðMn0:75Fe0:25Þ2O3ðsÞ þ DRh  4 ðMn0:75Fe0:25Þ3O4ðsÞ þ O2
ð3Þ
The reaction proceeds via one or several two-phase regions at
intermediate temperatures in air. Inconsistent results have been
published regarding the nature of these two-phase regions for
the atomic ratio Fe/Mn of 1:3 analyzed in this work. This might
be attributed to the complexity of the Mn-Fe-O system, as man-
ganese and iron occur in multiple oxidation states, and sample
preparation as well as examination methods vary. Some reports
illustrate that the tetragonal spinel a-(Mn,Fe)3O4 (T), also known
as hausmannite phase, forms as intermediate. In this case the reac-
tion of the examined composition proceeds via the two-phase
ﬁelds ‘‘T + B” and ‘‘S + T” with rising temperature in air (Crum
et al., 2009; Muan and Somiya, 1962). In other phase diagrams,
though, the phase boundaries of those two-phase regions are
shifted further towards Mn-rich compositions, such that the con-
templated reaction proceeds via the two-phase region ‘‘B + S”
(Kjellqvist and Selleby, 2010; Weiland, 2002; Wickham, 1969).
Previous work has focused on the preparation of high-purity
manganese-iron oxides (ﬁne powders) with different Fe contents
by a modiﬁed sol-gel based Pechini method, accompanied by a
general assessment of the reactivity and its overall potential as
thermochemical storage material (Block and Schmücker, 2016;
Carrillo et al., 2015). In this regard Carrillo et al. targeted a detailed
understanding
of
the
redox
kinetics
of
the
redox
couple
(Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3/(Mn0.8Fe0.2)3O4 for a future deployment in CSP
plants. The stability of the material has been demonstrated over
Fig. 1. Schematic description of a potential regenerator-type storage with thermo-
chemical storage material, allowing to exploit the sensible heat and heat of reaction
due to a temperature stratiﬁcation along the bed height: storage charging (a) and
storage discharging (b). The potential dimensions of the TCS zone in the top part
(dark gray) and the non-reactive zone with inert material in the lower part (light
gray) are marked for exempliﬁcation.
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
473


===== Page 4 =====

75 redox cycles in this work. On the one hand, rate law models
based on a nucleation and growth mechanism have been proposed
for both the reduction and oxidation reaction. However, the depen-
dence of those reaction rates on the oxygen partial pressure, which
inclusion would be important for reactor modeling and future
reactor development, has not been taken into account. On the
other hand, the authors focused on scrutinizing the arising crystal-
lographic transformations and the role of Fe incorporation on the
oxidation rate improvement. The latter was hypothesized to be
attributed to an enlargement of Mn-O bond lengths of Mn2+ cations
induced by the Fe incorporation, facilitating the mobility of oxygen
anions through the lattice during oxidation (Carrillo et al., 2016b).
Although manganese-iron based oxides prepared from techni-
cal grade raw material have been investigated in the ﬁeld of CLOU,
the operating methods of CLOU-reactors differ signiﬁcantly from
the methods relevant for thermochemical storage reactors. Conse-
quently, the redox reaction of the storage material has to fulﬁll dif-
ferent requirements in comparison to CLOU. Up to date little work
has been done on a comprehensive, systematic examination of
metal oxide redox cycles for thermochemical energy storage in
order to concentrate qualitative and quantitative material proper-
ties data with respect to the thermodynamic, kinetic and cycling
stability behavior. In the current publication the identiﬁcation of
the reactive temperature ranges of the manganese-iron oxide
under study as well as the effective reaction rates to be expected
will be addressed with regard to the envisaged technical applica-
tion of a hybrid regenerator-type storage. Granules of technical
grade raw materials are applied in this work, as the utilization of
ﬁne powders on a larger scale potentially causes sintering, particle
agglomeration as well as enhanced pressure losses and would
therefore not allow a storage operation with direct contact heat
exchange between the gas and solid phase.
In the ﬁrst part of the present paper, dynamic experiments are
performed by means of simultaneous thermal analysis in order to
derive the oxygen partial pressure (pO2) dependent reaction tem-
peratures of the reduction and oxidation step. Special emphasis
is placed on the technically relevant material reactivity, taking
the presence of a thermal hysteresis into account. The knowledge
of the pO2-T dependency is fundamental, as a rise/drop of the oxy-
gen partial pressure owing to the release/uptake of O2 during the
charging/discharging step or even due to storage operating meth-
ods using pressurization/pressure reduction directly affects the
reaction temperature. In the second part, simpliﬁed kinetic equa-
tions for the reduction and oxidation – valid for different oxygen
partial pressures – are derived from experimental data of the
examined material, which equations have not been reported so
far for manganese-iron oxide. The equations describe the depen-
dence of the effective reaction rates on temperature and oxygen
partial pressure, respectively. Thereafter, the model equations
can be employed for reactor models to describe the behavior of a
thermochemical storage reactor, additionally taking heat and mass
transfer phenomena into account. For an evaluation of the cycling
behavior the technical grade redox material under investigation is
cycled 100 times in air.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Material preparation and characterization
Granular manganese-iron oxide used in this study was prepared
by means of a build-up granulation technique, which was per-
formed by VITO (Mol, Belgium). In the process technical grade
powders of Fe2O3 (CAS No. 1309-37-1, 98% from Alfa Aesar) and
Mn3O4 (CAS No. 1317-35-7, TRIMANOX electronic grade, supplied
by Chemalloy) were mixed with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3, which
corresponds to a Fe2O3/Mn3O4 mass ratio of 25.9:74.1. An Eirich
Mixer with a capacity of 5 liters as shown in Fig. 2 (left) was used
for the granulation of the TCS material, based on the principle of
intensive mixing by rotation of an inclined mixing pan and appli-
cation of a rotating micro-granulator mixing tool (middle).
The powders were combined in the dry state and immediately
treated in the Eirich mixer. There was no need to use organic addi-
tives and binders. A total mass fraction of 18% deionized water
was added to the dry components to obtain an optimal granulated
material in a narrow size range. This was done by adding a mass
fraction of 12.5% deionized water at the start and additional
1.25% every 5 min. The rotating speed of the pan, which is an
important parameter to receive fairly spherical granules, was set
to 42 rpm. The rotor speed of the mixing tool inﬂuencing the gran-
ule size (together with the residence time) was set to 283 rpm over
a period of 5 min after each addition of water. The strength of the
granulated material after 1 h of drying at 105 C was high enough
for sieving. The mixed material was sieved in the dry state in order
to separate a particle size fraction from 1.15 mm to 3.15 mm prior
to calcination. This fraction was sintered in aluminum oxide cru-
cibles, 4 h at 1025 C and 4 h at 1050 C in air, yielding the targeted
combined manganese-iron oxide, which oxidized during cooling.
Due to shrinkage of the granulated particles upon heat treatment
a particle size range of approximately 1 mm to 3 mm was obtained
for experimental studies (Fig. 2, right).
The crystalline phase composition of the raw material in the
oxidized state was determined by X-ray powder diffractometry
(XRD) on a Bruker D8 Advance instrument using Cu-Ka1,2 radia-
tion. The background subtracted XRD pattern in Fig. 3 shows a
cubic Mn2O3 crystal phase (bixbyite phase; ICDD PDF-2, #41-
1442) with the crystal space group Ia3, which is consistent with
the discussed phase diagrams above. The subtraction of the back-
ground does not distort the data, as the raw data without back-
ground subtraction gave no indication of the presence of an
amorphous fraction. Moreover, a Ka2 correction has not been con-
ducted, so the peak width in Fig. 3 has not been altered. It has to be
mentioned, that the cubic FeMnO3 crystal structure (bimetallic bix-
byite phase; ICDD PDF-2, #75-0894; space group Ia3) exhibits vir-
tually the same peak positions with a peak displacement by only
0.02 (2H). Thus, a differentiation between the bixbyite phase
Mn2O3 and bixbyite structure (Mn,Fe)2O3 only based on the lattice
parameters is not feasible.
X-ray ﬂuorescence spectroscopy (XRF) was applied for an accu-
rate determination of the cation ratios in the sample. The XRF anal-
ysis revealed the average elemental composition of the granules,
giving mass fractions of 52.0% Mn, 17.7% Fe, 0.32% Si, 0.31% Al,
0.04% Ca, 0.05% Mg and 29.6% O. Thus, a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3
could be veriﬁed. Consequently, for the sake of simplicity the pre-
pared raw material will be denoted (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 throughout
this work.
2.2. Apparatus and experimental procedure
The measurements of the redox reaction were carried out in a
simultaneous thermal analyzer from Netzsch (STA 449 F3 Jupiter),
coupling thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scan-
ning calorimetry (DSC). A dry ﬂow of nitrogen 5.0 was used as
purge and protective gas, oxygen 5.0 was utilized as purge gas.
The latter was mixed with nitrogen to adjust the desired oxygen
volume fractions. The overall gas ﬂow rate surrounding the sample
was set to 100 mL(STP)/min, with the balance being protected by a
nitrogen ﬂow of 30 mL(STP)/min. Fresh starting material of
manganese-iron oxide in the oxidized form was used for each sin-
gle measurement. Two granules with an average overall weight of
typically 30 mg were placed in the middle of a Pt/Rh-crucible with
474
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 5 =====

a volume of 85 lL throughout all measurement series. In order to
ensure comparability, two granules of approximately the same
weight were chosen, respectively. Crucibles were always utilized
without a lid to enable sufﬁcient O2 exchange between the sample
and the surrounding gas atmosphere, which is crucial for thermo-
dynamic and kinetic analyses in this work. A separate baseline
measurement was carried out for correction of each single sample
measurement.
A reference cycle was always performed as material pre-
treatment prior to the actual redox cycle used for data evaluation,
so that equal starting conditions could be provided for each sample
measurement. The reference cycle was conducted in air, adjusting
a gas ﬂow of 20 ml(STP)/min oxygen and 80 ml(STP)/min nitrogen:
Initially the sample is heated up to 200 C and held for 30 min.
Then the material undergoes a redox cycle during heating at a rate
of 10 K/min up to 1060 C (reduction) and cooling at a rate of 10 K/
min down to 750 C (oxidation), followed by an isothermal period
of 30 min. Within the scope of subsequent experiments performed
at different oxygen atmospheres the gas ﬂow is switched to the
desired oxygen fraction in the middle of this isothermal period at
750 C (after 15 min). The procedure for the redox cycles to be fur-
ther analyzed is explained in the following. Based on reported
phase diagrams a temperature of 1060 C in air should be adequate
for the formation of the cubic spinel phase b-(Mn,Fe)3O4 (Crum
et al., 2009; Kjellqvist and Selleby, 2010; Wickham, 1969).
Dynamic measurements at different heating and cooling rates
were performed in various O2 atmospheres to identify experimen-
tal pO2-T conditions for the reaction onsets and determine the tem-
perature regions, where the material still exhibits a technically
relevant reactivity. Heating and cooling rates of 0.5, 1, 2, 5 and
10 K/min were chosen for the reduction and corresponding oxida-
tion step. The absolute pressure inside the reaction chamber is
equal to the measured atmospheric pressure pambient (Lufft hand-
held measuring device XA1000 with integrated air pressure sensor,
accuracy of 0.05 kPa at 25 C and 101.325 kPa). The pO2 – relevant
for thermodynamic estimations and kinetic analyses – was deter-
mined based on the product of the employed oxygen volume frac-
tion of the gas ﬂow (which equals the molar fraction yO2) and
pambient in the laboratory to account for natural ﬂuctuations. Aver-
age oxygen partial pressures of 5.1 ± 0.017 kPa, 10.1 ± 0.106 kPa,
20.4 ± 0.271 kPa, 40.4 ± 0.132 kPa and 71.1 ± 0.114 kPa were real-
ized for the respective series of dynamic measurements. The
adjustment of a pO2 > 70 kPa is not possible due to the experi-
mental setup, as the balance is ﬂushed with 30 ml(STP)/min N2 at
all times. The pO2 is assumed to be constant throughout each
experimental run owing to the small amount of sample as well
as relatively low heating and cooling rates.
For isothermal oxidation measurements in different O2 atmo-
spheres, the material was again reduced at a heating rate of
10 K/min up to 1060 C and subsequently cooled down to 980 C
in air, after the reference cycle respectively. Further cooling down
to the desired temperature for oxidation was performed in pure N2
in order to prevent a premature re-oxidation. After a holding time
of 10 min to wait for a steady sample temperature, the oxidation
was initiated by switching to the desired O2 atmosphere. The latter
was adjusted by means of the required fractions of the correspond-
ing O2 and N2 volume ﬂow rate at an overall ﬂow rate of 100 mL
(STP)/min.
Fig. 2. Eirich Mixer (left) and micro-granulator rotor type (middle) used for the build-up granulation of the storage material; prepared manganese-iron oxide granulate after
heat treatment in air (right).
Fig. 3. X-ray diffraction pattern of the manganese-iron oxide raw material in the oxidized state.
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
475


===== Page 6 =====

The recorded DSC signal was chosen for the calculation of the
extrapolated peak onset temperatures of the redox reaction at dif-
ferent heating and cooling rates, respectively. This data evaluation
was performed using the software Netzsch Proteus 6.1 through-
out this study. It is important to note that the determination of
extrapolated peak onset temperatures represents an approxima-
tion, as those temperatures per se do not reﬂect the actual begin-
ning of the reaction, which is apparently registered prior to that.
The actual reaction start turns out to be quite difﬁcult to assess
in a reproducible way. On this account the chosen approach stands
for a reproducible evaluation methodology. Hereinafter the abbre-
viated term ‘‘onset temperature” always refers to the ‘‘extrapolated
peak onset temperature”. In this work the reaction time is esti-
mated according to the changes of the ﬁrst derivative of the ther-
mogravimetric curve, indicating the beginning and the end of the
mass change owing to the respective redox reaction.
2.3. Thermodynamic equilibrium and kinetic modeling of gas-solid
reactions
Derived from the expression for the standard Gibbs energy of
reversible reactions DRG0 = RTln(Keq) (with Keq being the equilib-
rium constant; Keq(T) = (pO2/p0)mO2 according to Eq. (3)) and the
deﬁnition DRG0 = DRH0  T DRS0 in terms of the standard enthalpy
and entropy changes of reactions at a given temperature T, the
following equation describes the correlation between the oxygen
partial
pressure
and
the
temperature
at
thermodynamic
equilibrium:
lnðKeqÞ ¼ ln
peq
p0


¼  DRH0
RTeq
þ DRS0
R
or in particular ln
pO2
p0


¼  DRH0
mO2RTeq
þ DRS0
mO2R
ð4Þ
with the pressure p0 of 100 kPa at standard conditions. The partial
derivative of expression (4) with respect to the variable Teq at con-
stant pressure yields the so called van ’t Hoff equation. It becomes
apparent, that in the storage process both charging and discharg-
ing temperatures depend on the partial pressure of the gaseous
reactant – oxygen in the case of the redox reaction of metal oxi-
des, as shown on the right-hand side of Eq. (4). Plotting the loga-
rithmic partial pressures against the reciprocal temperatures at
thermodynamic equilibrium gives a linear relationship, which
slope is proportional to the standard reaction enthalpy. The stan-
dard reaction entropy is obtained from the constant ordinate
intercept.
Thermogravimetric measurements provide the basis for a
kinetic analysis of the redox reaction (Vyazovkin et al., 2014).
The general differential form of the reaction rate of a single-step
process represents a widely accepted empirical expression for
heterogeneous gas-solid reactions (Vyazovkin et al., 2011):
dX
dt ¼ kðTÞ  fðXÞ  hðpO2; pO2;eqðTÞÞ
ð5Þ
This parameterization of the reaction rate is applied for the
kinetic analyses in the current work in order to establish a mathe-
matical relationship between the conversion rate and temperature,
extent of conversion, pressure of the reaction gas as well as ther-
modynamic equilibrium for the respective reaction steps (reduc-
tion and oxidation). The approach to separate and identify the
temperature-, conversion- and pressure-dependent terms of the
expression (5) varies for the reduction and oxidation, depending
on the chosen measurement methodology (Vyazovkin et al.,
2011). The temperature dependence of the reaction rate – repre-
sented by the rate constant k(T) – is empirically described based
on the exponential Arrhenius equation:
kðTÞ ¼ A  exp
 Ea
R  T


ð6Þ
The Arrhenius temperature dependence includes the pre-
exponential factor A as a measure for the collision rate of the reac-
tants, the activation energy Ea and the universal gas constant R. The
dependence of the reaction rate on the extent of conversion can be
described by a variety of available kinetic models f(X), generally
representing different reaction mechanisms (Galwey and Brown,
1999). The standardized extent of conversion for the reduction XRed
and oxidation XOx, ranging from 0 to 1, is deﬁned as:
XRed ¼
minitial  mt
minitial  mfinal
and
XOx ¼
mt  minitial
mfinal  minitial
ð7Þ
with the initial weight prior to reaction (mintial) and the ﬁnal weight
after reaction (mﬁnal) of the corresponding redox step, mt denotes
the current sample weight at time t. The pre-exponential factor A,
the activation energy Ea and the reaction mechanism f(X) represent
the so called kinetic triplet of the investigated process step
(Vyazovkin et al., 2011). Although the pressure term h(pO2,peq(T))
is often neglected in kinetic computations, it can exert a strong
inﬂuence on kinetic processes (Vyazovkin et al., 2011). Especially
in reversible gas-solid reactions the pressure dependence gains
importance, commonly specifying the dependence of the reaction
rate on the applied partial pressure of the reaction gas (pO2) and
the corresponding pressure of the gas at thermodynamic equilib-
rium (pO2,eq(T)). The term can also be referred to as the ‘‘driving for-
ce” for the reaction and reﬂects the reversible character of the
reaction. h(pO2,peq(T)) can potentially adopt different mathematical
expressions (Ron, 1999), such as the following, illustrated for the
reduction step:
1 
pO2
pO2;eqðTÞ
 
!m
ðpO2;eqðTÞ  pO2Þm
ln
pO2;eqðTÞ
pO2



m
pOm
2
ð8Þ
The exponent m constitutes the order of the pressure depen-
dence, which is used to adapt the suitable pressure term to the
experimental data. The term on the very left hand side stands for
the most common approach for reversible solid-state decomposi-
tion reactions (Vyazovkin et al., 2011). Expressions for the corre-
sponding oxidation step can be phrased vice versa.
The mathematical equations of the reaction rates, describing
the temperature and pressure dependence of the respective reac-
tion, form the basis for transient reactor models used for the sim-
ulation of thermochemical storage reactors. It has to be noted, that
the mathematical models evolved in this work reﬂect an approxi-
mation of empirical data without claiming a profound interpreta-
tion of the underlying physical processes of the reaction. The
models represent effective reaction rates for the reduction and oxi-
dation, comprising apparent values for the pre-exponential factor,
the activation energy and the reaction mechanism.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Redox cycle and reaction enthalpy
A standard redox cycle with a heating and cooling rate of
10 K/min in air is illustrated in Fig. 4. The change of the DSC signal
is related to the absorption and release of thermal energy, thus
indicating the reaction enthalpy of the endothermic reduction
and exothermic oxidation step. The small drift of the DSC signal
can be attributed to the measurement conditions, as crucibles
without a covering lid are applied.
The beginning of the reduction (onset temperature) is identiﬁed
at approximately 988.6 C in the heating step, whereas the oxida-
476
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 7 =====

tion is setting in at about 895.0 C in the subsequent cooling step.
Complete reversibility of the redox reaction is given. As reduction
and oxidation set in at different temperature levels, the presence of
a thermal hysteresis becomes apparent, decoupling the two redox
reactions. Generally, a pronounced hysteresis is unfavorable for a
thermochemical storage system, where it is crucial to release ther-
mal energy at a high temperature level. This characteristic behav-
ior of materials based on manganese oxide eventually implicates a
loss of exergy. In contrast to pure manganese oxide the reaction
time for complete oxidation of the manganese-iron oxide amounts
to 6.4 min and is therefore in the same range as the time for com-
plete reduction with 6.2 min. Consequently, the current observa-
tions applying technical grade material corroborate the ﬁndings of
previous studies on hysteresis (Carrillo et al., 2015) as well as on
enhanced oxidation rates (Block and Schmücker, 2016; Carrillo
et al., 2015; Wong et al., 2010).
For the calculation of the theoretical mass change the Fe frac-
tion is taken into account. The average weight loss of the reduction
step amounts to about 3.18% throughout the experiments con-
ducted in this work, which is lower than the expected weight loss
of 3.37% given by the stoichiometry of the reaction in Eq. (3). Based
on this observation about 94.4% of the technical grade redox mate-
rial is considered reactive, the remaining 5.6% inert. Consequently,
in subsequent examinations a weight loss of 3.18% is adopted as
complete conversion of the reaction.
The shape of the DSC peaks in Fig. 4 does not indicate the exis-
tence of a two-phase region in the process of the redox reaction,
which would be expected according to various reports on the
phase diagram of the Mn-Fe-O system (Kjellqvist and Selleby,
2010; Wickham, 1969; Crum et al., 2009). However, the absence
of its indication might be attributed to the relatively small temper-
ature range of the two-phase region along with the dynamic mea-
suring conditions.
In this work a speciﬁc reaction enthalpy of about 271 J/g
(Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 was measured by means of differential scanning
calorimetry, using a pierced lid for the reference and sample cru-
cible throughout the calibration and measurement runs in this
case. The enthalpy value corresponds to about 273 kJ/mol O2,
which has been calculated based on assumed full stoichiometric
reaction conversion. A similar value (254 kJ/mol O2) was speciﬁed
for the redox reaction of a binary oxide with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of
1:4 (Rydén et al., 2014). However, the determined enthalpy of reac-
tion in the current work turns out to be higher than the previously
reported experimentally obtained values for similar compositions
(Block and Schmücker, 2016; Carrillo et al., 2015).
3.2. Thermodynamic examinations
According to the described passive dual media storage concept
(compare regenerator-type storage in Fig. 1) the envisaged TCS
reactor will be operated using air as HTF in direct contact with
the storage material during charging and discharging. The coupling
of the HTF and reaction gas supply has a direct inﬂuence on the
reaction temperature due to the correlation between oxygen par-
tial pressure and temperature, as oxygen is released and taken
up during a storage cycle. Consequently, the knowledge of the
position of the thermodynamic equilibrium for different oxygen
partial pressures is essential to identify the relevant temperature
ranges for reduction and oxidation as well as to specify the operat-
ing boundary conditions of the reactor. In this work simultaneous
thermal analysis measurements were carried out to identify exper-
imental pO2-T conditions for the redox process (reduction and oxi-
dation step) and reveal potentially occurring limitations, which
knowledge is highly relevant from a technical point of view.
In general the difference between the measured onset temper-
ature and the equilibrium temperature of a phase transition
decreases with diminishing heating and cooling rates. The German
Society for Thermal Analysis (GEFTA) has suggested a procedure to
approach the thermodynamic equilibrium temperature by an
extrapolation of determined onset temperatures for different tem-
perature ramps to a heating and cooling rate of zero (Hemminger
and Cammenga, 1989; Höhne et al., 1990). In order to study the
temperature ramp dependency of the reaction onset and test this
procedure in the present examination of manganese-iron oxide,
measurements at different temperature ramps were performed
as described in chapter 2.2. The lowest temperature ramps applied
(0.5 K/min) are considered sufﬁcient for the current characteriza-
tion with respect to a technical application of the material.
Fig. 5 shows the dependence of the onset temperatures at var-
ious oxygen fractions under atmospheric pressure on different
heating rates for the reduction (positive x-coordinate) as well as
on the respective cooling rates for the oxidation (negative x-
coordinate). Generally, higher onset temperatures were measured
for the transition of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3/(Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 compared
to pure Mn2O3/Mn3O4, which is in accordance with reported phase
diagrams for air as well as previous ﬁndings for similar composi-
Fig. 4. Excerpt of dynamic redox cycle of manganese-iron oxide with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3, applying a heating rate of 10 K/min up to 1060 C and a cooling rate of 10 K/
min down to 750 C in air.
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
477


===== Page 8 =====

tions of manganese-iron oxide (Block and Schmücker, 2016;
Carrillo et al., 2015; Crum et al., 2009; Kjellqvist and Selleby,
2010; Wickham, 1969).
The progress of the determined onset temperatures of the
reduction and oxidation can be represented adequately by means
of an exponential function. Reduction onset temperatures for 5 K/
min and 10 K/min at a pO2 of 40.4 kPa differed from the exponen-
tial trend and were not included in the respective exponential ﬁt
for the sake of simplicity (points marked by boxes). An extrapola-
tion of the onset temperatures to a heating and cooling rate of 0 K/
min would generally lead to the equilibrium state of the reaction.
This is obviously not the case for the illustrated trend in Fig. 5, as
the determined onset temperatures are still far away from the
actual equilibrium, even for the lowest temperature ramp of
0.5 K/min. At least for the oxidation step the thermodynamic equi-
librium could not even nearly be approached, which characteristic
oxidation behavior will be elaborately discussed below (see Figs. 6
and 7). It is important to note, that the progress of the exponential
trend towards the thermodynamic equilibrium cannot be discov-
ered by means of the available data, as the trend is presumed to
be more pronounced for heating and cooling rates lower than the
adjusted 0.5 K/min. As we will see later, the oxidation proceeds
extremely slow closer to the equilibrium (Fig. 7), which is why
considerably lower temperature ramps would be necessary. The
setting of lower temperature ramps, however, is limited due to a
loss of instrument sensitivity, rendering the analysis of the DSC sig-
nal difﬁcult. Furthermore, lower ramps are not relevant from an
application-oriented point of view. On this account the prolonga-
tion of the exponential trend for heating and cooling rates lower
than 0.5 K/min is only displayed by a dotted curve, respectively
(Fig. 5). The values obtained for heating and cooling rates of
0 K/min at different oxygen partial pressures do not represent
equilibrium conditions in the current work and are therefore
deﬁned as technically relevant temperature threshold values,
beyond which the reactions do not become visually evident in
the presented dynamic measurements.
The experimentally determined temperature thresholds and
corresponding oxygen partial pressures are summarized in a lin-
earized van’t Hoff plot (Fig. 6), plotting the average pO2 on a loga-
rithmic
scale
versus
the
reciprocal
temperature
threshold,
respectively. A linear correlation (pO2-T) between the pO2 and
the temperature thresholds can be derived for the reduction and
oxidation step, as marked in the diagram. In addition, Fig. 6 also
illustrates the equilibrium partial pressure of oxygen (pO2,eq) as a
function of the temperature, calculated with the thermochemical
software FactSage using the FToxid database. Due to the presence
of the small two-phase ﬁeld, where the bixbyite and spinel phase
coexist, two equilibrium conditions are deduced according to Eq.
(4), referred to as phase boundary lines below. Only the partial
pressure range which exhibits a linear relationship between partial
pressure and temperature is represented in the van’t Hoff plot
(from 2.6 kPa to 100 kPa). Below 2.6 kPa the additional two-
phase ﬁeld ‘‘T + B” begins, which is out of the envisaged operating
range of a TCS reactor and will therefore not be addressed in this
work. The presence of the illustrated two-phase ﬁeld ‘‘B + S” is in
accordance
with
phase
diagrams
reported
in
the
literature
(Kjellqvist and Selleby, 2010; Weiland, 2002; Wickham, 1969). As
expected we can assert, that the intrinsic thermodynamic equilib-
ria are located between the experimentally determined pO2-T con-
ditions. However, the deviation of the oxidation conditions from
equilibrium is clearly larger. The crosses marked in the diagram
indicate the measurement conditions for isothermal oxidations,
which are explained below (see Fig. 7).
The linear correlations for the experimentally determined data
and equilibrium data in Fig. 6 can be rearranged to yield expres-
sions according to Eq. (4), derived from the van’t Hoff equation.
The corresponding linear approximations with the corresponding
slope (S) and y-intercept (Y) are summarized in Table 1:
ln
pO2
105Pa


¼ S 
1000
TRedjOx=K þ Y
ð9Þ
For atmospheric air at 101.325 kPa with a pO2 of 21.228 kPa a tem-
perature threshold of 981.8 C can be calculated for the reduction
and 920.4 C for the oxidation based on the experimentally deter-
mined pO2-T correlations, respectively. The equilibrium correlations
pO2,eq-Teq derived from FactSage data yield temperatures of
968.5 C (phase boundary line of ‘‘B” – ‘‘B + S”) and 973.8 C (phase
boundary line of ‘‘B + S” – ‘‘S”) in air. Based on the average of both
equilibrium lines (eqI and eqII in Table 1) for the phase boundaries,
a molar standard reaction enthalpy of 287.1 kJ/mol O2 can be eval-
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
815
830
845
860
875
890
905
920
935
950
965
980
995
1010
1025
1040
1055
Oxidation
O2 partial pressure
71.1 kPa
40.4 kPa
20.4 kPa
10.1 kPa
5.1 kPa
Exponential trend
Onset-Temperature / °C
Cooling Rate Heating Rate / (K/min)
Reduction
Fig. 5. Extrapolated peak onset temperatures of the reduction and oxidation for
various oxygen partial pressures plotted against different heating (positive x-
coordinate) and cooling (negative x-coordinate) rates; onset temperatures deter-
mined on the basis of the measured DSC signal.
Fig. 6. Correlation between oxygen partial pressures and temperature threshold
values (derived from Fig. 5) for the reduction of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 to (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4
and oxidation of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 to (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3; equilibrium conditions for
manganese-iron oxide with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3 calculated by means of the
thermochemical software FactSage is displayed for comparison (dashed lines);
predominant phases: ‘‘B” = cubic bixbyite, ‘‘S” = cubic spinel and ‘‘B + S” = two-
phase area of bixbyite and spinel.
478
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 9 =====

uated for the redox reaction from the linear slope according to Eq.
(4). The measured enthalpy value based on DSC deviates by around
5% (273 kJ/mol O2).
Fig. 6 accentuates the presence of a large thermal hysteresis
under the prevailing experimental conditions, thermally decou-
pling the reduction and oxidation step. The thermal hysteresis
implies the occurrence of a ”passive‘‘ temperature range close to
equilibrium, where the driving force of the reaction is low and
hence the reaction – especially the oxidation step, showing an
asymmetrical behavior – takes a long time to be initiated and to
proceed. This is why this range has no technical relevance and can-
not be exploited for a TCS operation in this manganese-iron oxide
reaction system. The hysteresis can therefore also be referred to as
‘‘technical hysteresis”. We can ascertain from Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 that
the hysteresis extends over a broader temperature range at lower
oxygen partial pressures, whereas the region becomes smaller at
higher oxygen partial pressures (despite the inverse plotting of
the temperature). Moreover, Carrillo et al. reported a narrowing
of the thermal hysteresis loop of manganese-iron oxide with
increasing degree of Fe doping compared to pure manganese oxide
(Carrillo et al., 2015), which allows to accomplish higher discharg-
ing temperatures. This ﬁnding could be conﬁrmed for the compo-
sition in the current study.
The redox reaction cannot proceed at the equilibrium tempera-
ture. A comparison of the experimentally determined pO2-T depen-
dencies (thresholds) and the calculated equilibrium conditions in
Fig. 6 reveals, that different degrees of overheating and undercool-
ing DT are required to initiate the corresponding phase transition
of the reduction or oxidation. Only a low degree of overheating
DT is necessary for the reduction to set in, as the increase of the
thermodynamic driving force DG as well as the general increase
of the reaction rate with rising temperature both favor the reduc-
tion. In contrast, the initiation of the oxidation requires a large
degree of undercooling DT to overcome the activation energy bar-
rier DG⁄ for the formation of a cluster (nuclei) with a critical radius
by statistical thermal ﬂuctuations. Hence, the oxidation step is pri-
marily subjected to kinetic limitations during cooling.
Fig. 7 illustrates isothermal oxidation measurements within the
experimentally determined hysteresis loop. These clearly demon-
strate, why the methodology to extrapolate the onset temperatures
for different temperature ramps to a respective rate of 0 K/min
does not necessarily lead to the identiﬁcation of the thermody-
namic equilibrium on the basis of the underlying data set (lowest
ramp of merely 0.5 K/min, compare Fig. 5) – especially in the case
of the present severe kinetic limitations. However, since these sev-
ere kinetic limitations hinder a technical application, this chosen
methodology gives a ﬁrst idea of technically relevant operation
conditions and allows to determine the described temperature
thresholds for different oxygen partial pressures.
Fig. 7 reveals that the oxidation reaction actually proceeds at
temperatures within the experimentally determined hysteresis
range, verifying the assumption of underlying kinetic limitations
closer to the equilibrium in the oxidation step. While at a temper-
ature of 916.5 C – below the aforesaid temperature threshold of
920.4 C in air – only a short induction period could be observed,
a fairly long induction period of over 30 min is discovered for a
temperature of 926.6 C exceeding the temperature threshold
marked in Fig. 6. Overall, we have to differentiate between the
temperature range below and above the experimentally deter-
mined pO2-T threshold condition for the oxidation step, as for
the latter the reaction progress changes drastically. Even though
the required reaction rate might depend on the application, this
temperature range can be excluded as potential operating condi-
tion, if a complete conversion cannot even be reached within a per-
iod of 8 h of oxidation.
Overall, we arrive at the conclusion, that the knowledge of the
actual equilibrium state is not sufﬁcient for the description of the
reactive temperature range. The presented dynamic measurement
methodology, however, allows a good approximation of the tem-
perature thresholds at different oxygen partial pressures, beyond
which thresholds – from a technical point of view – the redox reac-
tions proceed in a reasonable period of time upon further heating
in the reduction or cooling in the oxidation step. While the pO2-T
threshold conditions for the reduction are closer to the equilibrium
conditions, the corresponding pO2-T threshold conditions for the
oxidation are far-off, mainly attributed to prevailing kinetic
limitations.
3.3. Effective reaction rate of the reduction
The pressure term h(pO2,pO2,eqII(TRed)) corresponding to Eq. (5)
generally exerts an inﬂuence on the reaction rate within the scope
of the determination of the rate constant k(TRed) of the reaction,
which is due to the temperature dependence of the equilibrium
pressure pO2,eqII(TRed). Consequently, dynamic measurements at
different heating rates (0.5, 1.0, 2.0, 5.0 and 10.0 K/min) are per-
formed in pure N2 atmosphere at ﬁrst, in order to exclude the inﬂu-
ence of the pressure term on the reaction. In the process the partial
pressure of O2 released during the reaction is neglected.
Based on the reaction rate in terms of the time derivative of
experimental conversion data, a parameterization according to
Eq. (5) yields the following effective reaction rate for the reduction
step:
Table 1
Experimentally determined correlations between pO2 and temperature threshold
value for the reduction and oxidation onset of the considered redox reaction as well
as pO2 as a function of the temperature at equilibrium (see phase boundary lines eqI
and eqII, calculated on the basis of FactSage data for an oxide composition with a
Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3) according to Eq. (9).
Reaction step | Phase boundary (FactSage)
S (slope)
Y (y-intercept)
pO2-T correlation for reduction threshold
(this work)
36.874
27.833
pO2-T correlation for oxidation threshold
(this work)
27.159
21.205
Phase boundary line of ‘‘bixbyite” –
‘‘bixbyite + spinel” (eqI)
34.538
26.265
Phase boundary line of ‘‘bixbyite + spinel” –
‘‘spinel” (eqII)
34.522
26.134
Fig. 7. Isothermal oxidation of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 in air at different temperatures
within the experimentally determined thermal hysteresis range (apart from the
measurement at 916.5 C).
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
479


===== Page 10 =====

dXRed
dt
¼ 2:74  1013 1
s exp
 355:72 kJ
mol
RTRed
 
!
 1:95ð1
 XRedÞ½ lnð1  XRedÞ
1 1
1:95
ð
Þ 
1 
pO2
pO2;eqIIðTRedÞ
 
!4:55
ð10Þ
The developed model for the effective reaction rate is valid for
temperatures up to about 1085 C and oxygen partial pressures
between 5 kPa and 70 kPa. For the reactivity beyond the given
ranges the model serves only as a rough estimation. The evaluation
procedure for the evolution of the reaction model is summarized
below.
Fig. 8 illustrates the corresponding experimental conversion
curves in N2 (symbols), which show a strong dependence of the
onset and offset temperatures of the reaction on the applied heat-
ing rate. The onset temperatures of the reaction shift to higher val-
ues with increasing heating rate. All curves reveal a rather long
drawn-out progress of the reaction onset. This characteristic curve
progression has also been observed in the reduction of pure Mn2O3
to Mn3O4 in N2 or Ar (Alonso et al., 2013; Botas et al., 2012).
Generally, the reduction temperature can be signiﬁcantly
decreased due to the prevailing N2 atmosphere, as Fig. 8 indicates.
The experiments illustrate the heat transfer limited nature of the
reduction step, implying that an enhancement of the heating rate
entails higher reaction rates, which has also been stated by
Carrillo et al. (2014, 2015). Thus, the reaction rate obeys the tem-
perature dependence described by the Arrhenius term in Eq. (6).
An in situ XRD analysis of the reduction of manganese-iron oxide
with a similar composition (molar ratio Fe/Mn of 1:4) at 10 K/
min in argon by Carrillo et al. revealed the presence of two poly-
morphic spinel phases at a temperature of 900 C, namely the cubic
spinel b-(Mn,Fe)3O4 as the main phase and the tetragonal spinel a-
(Mn,Fe)3O4 to a minor extent. It was found, that in the absence of
O2 several reactions seem to proceed successively with increasing
temperature. The formation of the tetragonal spinel took place at
lower temperatures, whereas the prevailing formation of the cubic
spinel was identiﬁed at higher temperatures, where higher reac-
tion conversions (XRed > 0.5) have been reached (Carrillo et al.,
2016b).
The identiﬁcation of the kinetic triplet A, Ea and f(XRed) poses an
interlinked problem in dynamic measurements, as the reaction
rate depends on k(TRed) and f(XRed) at any given time. Therefore,
the apparent activation energy Ea is assessed by means of an
Arrhenius-type plot, plotting the logarithmic conversion rate at
constant conversion of 50% over the corresponding reciprocal tem-
perature for different heating rates, respectively, which is called a
differential isoconversional method (Friedman, 1964; Vyazovkin
et al., 2011). The slope of the linear regression is proportional to
the
apparent
activation
energy
Ea,
for
which
a
value
of
355.72 kJ/mol can be calculated. Similarly, Carrillo et al. carried
out the reduction of (Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3 at different heating rates in
argon and reported an average value of 371.2 kJ/mol also deter-
mined based on the Friedman method (Carrillo et al., 2016b).
Subsequently, the reaction mechanism f(XRed) and the pre-
exponential factor A are simultaneously quantiﬁed by plotting
the product y(XRed) of the experimental conversion rate and the
exponential part of the Arrhenius term against the conversion XRed
for each heating rate bi, respectively, following a common master
plot approach (Vyazovkin et al., 2011). A conversion step size of
1% is selected. A comparison of the shape of the experimental with
theoretical master plots leads to the most suitable kinetic model.
The conversion curves in N2 exhibit a sigmoidal shape, which is
why the empirical kinetic model f(XRed) of Avrami-Erofeev is cho-
sen. The parameter n of the corresponding model function along
with the pre-exponential factor A is determined by numerical
curve ﬁtting based on a minimization of the sum of error squares.
Fig. 8 shows the model prediction (dashed lines), with the pressure
term equal to unity.
In the ﬁnal step the dependence of the reaction rate on the gas
pressure is identiﬁed on the basis of dynamic measurements in dif-
ferent oxygen atmospheres, whereat measurements at 10 K/min
are used for the assessment in this work. The calculation is based
on the logarithm of Eq. (5), ln(dXRed/dt)-ln(A)+[Ea/(RTRed)]-ln[f
(XRed)] = ln[h(pO2,pO2,eqII(TRed))],
applying
the
isoconversional
method (XRed = 0.5). The phase boundary line ‘‘bixbyite + spinel” -
‘‘spinel” – denoted ‘‘eqII” in Table 1 – is applied as the equilibrium
pressure pO2,eqII(TRed) in the model equation of the reduction step,
with the equilibrium partial pressure of oxygen being calculated
according to the respective temperature at 50% conversion. Exper-
imental data are suitably represented by the pressure expression
[1  (pO2/pO2,eqII(TRed))]m. The slope of the linear relationship in
the double-logarithmic plot corresponds to the empirical exponent
m of the pressure term, giving a value of 4.55.
Fig. 9 displays the comparison of the model prediction against
the experimental conversion proﬁles of the reduction at various
O2 atmospheres and a heating rate of 2 K/min. All conversion
curves point out a similar progress of reaction, with a shift of the
curves according to the experimentally determined pO2-T depen-
Fig. 8. Reduction of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 at different heating rates in N2: symbols
correspond to experimental data, dashed lines to the prediction by the model for
the effective reaction rate; the pressure term equals unity in this case.
Fig. 9. Reduction of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 at a heating rate of 2 K/min in different O2
atmospheres: symbols correspond to experimental data, dashed lines to the
prediction by the model for the effective reaction rate according to Eq. (10).
480
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 11 =====

dency. Overall, in comparison to the measurement at 2 K/min in
N2, the onset of the reactions becomes sharper and the reaction
progress turns out to be steeper in different O2 atmospheres at
2 K/min, indicating higher reaction rates. These are essentially
evoked by higher reaction temperatures with rising pO2.
In summary, the reaction rate of the reduction increases with
rising temperature and falling oxygen partial pressure, which
corresponds to an increment of the temperature driving force
TRed  TeqII(pO2) as well as an increment of the pressure driving
force pO2,eqII(TRed)  pO2 for the reaction.
3.4. Effective reaction rate of the oxidation
Isothermal measurements are performed for the oxidation step
at different temperatures and oxygen partial pressures to demon-
strate the temperature and partial pressure dependence of the
reaction rate as well as to overcome the kinetic limitations
revealed in the section pertaining to thermodynamic investiga-
tions. The reactions are initiated by switching the gas atmosphere
from pure nitrogen to the desired oxygen content, imposing a sud-
den change of the pO2. Conversion and conversion rate of the trans-
formation to cubic bixbyite can be clearly attributed to the chosen
temperature and pO2 as a function of time, respectively.
As a result of the systematic parameterization of the reaction
rate using Eq. (5), the following effective reaction rate has been
deduced for the oxidation step:
dXOx
dt
¼ 1:78  1016 1
s exp
 463:53 kJ
mol
RTOx
 
!
 1:38ð1
 XOxÞ½ lnð1  XOxÞ
1 1
1:38
ð
Þ 
ln
pO2
pO2;eqIðTOxÞ
 
!7:06
ð11Þ
The developed model for the effective reaction rate is speciﬁ-
cally valid for temperatures above 800 C and oxygen partial pres-
sures between 15 kPa and 40 kPa. For the reactivity beyond the
given ranges the model serves only as a rough estimation.
A brief description of the derivation procedure for the evolution
of the reaction model is given below. At ﬁrst the pO2 was varied at
an isothermal temperature of 886.2 C in order to identify the pres-
sure dependence of the oxidation rate. The temperature was cho-
sen from a technological point of view in close-range of the
determined temperature threshold value for the oxidation in air,
as the storage material is essentially intended for utilization in
air. On this account the oxidation takes place during the cooling
process of the storage in air (discharging stage). The onset of the
dominant rate process in the experiments is deferred by a delay
period t0, which originates from the latency caused by switching
from N2 to the desired O2 atmosphere as well as from an induction
period required for the generation of growth nuclei before onset of
the acceleratory period (Galwey and Brown, 1999; Muroyama
et al., 2015). This induction period is highly dependent on the tem-
perature. The magnitude of t0 can be obtained from the intercept
on the t-axis of a g(XOx)-time plot, g(XOx) = k(TOx)t being the inte-
gral form of the suitable reaction model (determination see below).
In Fig. 10, the dependence of the oxidation rate on the prevalent
pO2 – and on the state of equilibrium accordingly – is shown. An
increment of the pO2 from 15 kPa to 40 kPa at constant temper-
ature, respectively, results in a signiﬁcant increase of the reaction
rate, emphasizing a strong impact of the oxygen partial pressure.
A rise of the partial pressure in this region implicates a stronger
driving pressure difference pO2  pO2,eqI(TOx) as well as tempera-
ture difference TeqI(pO2)  TOx to the equilibrium state at a con-
stant temperature of 886.2 C, shifting the reaction towards the
oxidized phase more rapidly. In general, the deviation of the cur-
rent state (pO2,TOx) from the equilibrium state (pO2,eqI,TeqI), also
known as the so called ‘‘equilibrium drop” (Shao et al., 2013), is
incremented accordingly.
A plot of the logarithm of the conversion rate ln(dXOx/dt) at 50%
conversion – according to the isoconversional method (Friedman,
1964; Vyazovkin et al., 2011) – against the logarithm of various
pressure terms (see also Eq. (8)), taking all measurements at differ-
ent oxygen partial pressures but constant temperature into
account, yields the best linear approximation for the logarithmic
function [ln(pO2/pO2,eqI(TOx))]m. The slope with a value of 7.06 cor-
responds to the empirical exponent m of this pressure term. The
phase boundary line ‘‘bixbyite” - ‘‘bixbyite + spinel” – denoted
‘‘eqI” in Table 1 – is applied as the equilibrium oxygen partial pres-
sure pO2,eqI(TOx) in the model equation of the oxidation step. Fig. 10
illustrates the model predictions based on expression (11) in com-
parison to the measurements, taking the corresponding delay peri-
ods t0 into account. The model clearly represents the effect of the
pressure dependency of the reaction rate.
A sigmoidal function on the basis of the Avrami-Erofeev mech-
anism has been chosen for the measurements at 855.8 C, 886.2 C
and 891.2 C in air, as well as for 886.2 C at 25.2 kPa and 40.7 kPa
O2. The corresponding parameter n of the kinetic model has been
ﬁtted to these experimental data, applying a typical master plot
method based on the differential form of the kinetic Eq. (5)
(Gotor et al., 2000). It follows a value of 1.38. We can also assert
that the reaction follows different mechanisms depending on the
temperature and pressure region.
The variation of the isothermal oxidation temperature in air
(Fig. 11) demonstrates a dependence of the reaction rate on the
equilibrium state similar to the pressure dependence described
above. As expected, the lowest reaction rates appear closer to the
thermodynamic equilibrium. Therefore, a temperature decrease
down to about 800 C results in an increase of the reaction rate
due to an enhancement of the driving temperature difference
TeqI(pO2)  TOx as well as pressure difference pO2  pO2,eqI(TOx) to
the equilibrium state.
The highest reaction rate in air is achieved between 750 C and
800 C, as indicated in Figs. 11 and 12. The most rapid reaction
takes place at temperatures close to 850 C, reaching complete
conversion within 10 min upon switching from N2 to air. The
observed deceleration of the reaction rate with rising temperature
closer to the equilibrium – T  800 C in the present case – has
also been reported for other metal oxide oxidations, such as for
the redox couples CuO/Cu2O (Clayton et al., 2014) and BaO2/BaO
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
4200
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
   pO2 at 886.2 °C  
  40.7 kPa  
  25.2 kPa  
  20.3 kPa  
  17.3 kPa  
  15.2 kPa  
  Model 
Conversion XOx / -
Time (t - t0) / s
Fig. 10. Oxidation of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 at 886.2 C close to equilibrium applying
different oxygen partial pressures: symbols correspond to experimental data,
dashed lines to the prediction by the model for the effective reaction rate according
to Eq. (11).
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
481


===== Page 12 =====

(Carrillo et al., 2016a), and is characteristic not only for reversible
gas-solid reactions.
In the ﬁnal step the temperature dependent term of the reaction
rate is derived from an Arrhenius-type plot at a conversion of 50%.
Therefor ln(dXOx/dt)-ln[h(pO2/pO2,eqI(TOx))]ln[f(XOx)] is plotted
versus the reciprocal temperature 1000/TOx for different isother-
mal measurements, taking the already identiﬁed parameters of
the pressure term and kinetic model into account. The modiﬁed
Arrhenius plot reveals a linear relationship for the temperature
range between 805.2 C and 891.2 C, with the slope giving an
apparent activation energy Ea of 463.53 kJ/mol. A pre-exponential
factor A of 1.781016 1/s can be calculated based on the y-
intercept. With temperatures below 805.2 C the slope and thus
the apparent activation energy decreases somewhat. Fig. 11 illus-
trates, that the evolved model (dashed lines) is in accordance with
the experimental curves (symbols).
Fig. 12 shows the conversion curves for temperatures far from
equilibrium. In this region the reaction rate clearly rises with
increasing temperature, as the temperature dependence of the
reaction rate corresponding to the Arrhenius term of Eq. (6)
constitutes the dominating factor on the rate. The inﬂuence of
the pressure driving force is only of minor importance in this tem-
perature region.
At temperatures far from equilibrium (T  800 C) the shape
of the conversion curves reveal distinctively, that the reaction pro-
ceeds via a different reaction mechanism. This is also the reason
why the reactions take a long time to reach full conversion. In
order to map the effective reaction rate far from equilibrium, a dif-
ferent kinetic model, the relevant apparent activation energy and
pre-exponential factor as well as a suitable pressure term – which
requires to measure the dependence of the reaction rate on the
oxygen partial pressure in this temperature range – have to be
deduced along the modeling procedure. In summary we can state,
that varying reaction mechanisms and dependencies on tempera-
ture and partial pressure make it difﬁcult to evolve a single reac-
tion rate expression valid for a broad temperature and pressure
range.
As a ﬁrst approximation it can be assumed that the representa-
tion of the empirical oxidation rate between the equilibrium tem-
perature down to 800 C in air works sufﬁciently for the simulation
of a thermochemical storage reactor in the case of the envisaged
technical application of a regenerator-type storage. When the stor-
age material is cooled down to extract thermal energy in the dis-
charging period, a rapid release of the heat of reaction is
expected as soon as the experimentally determined temperature
threshold of the oxidation (920 C in air) is exceeded, maintain-
ing particle temperatures close to this temperature (depending
on the operating conditions). This predicted behavior is due to an
increase of the reaction rate with declining temperature down to
800 C, which in turn leads to a raise of the heat release.
3.5. Test of cycling stability
Long-term cycling stability constitutes a crucial requirement for
a thermochemical storage material and implies the progress of a
reversible redox reaction over numerous cycles without slowdown
of the reaction rates due to microstructural changes, which could
be caused by phase changes or sintering effects. Exemplarily, a
sample was subjected to a test over 100 dynamic cycles in air
atmosphere. One cycle consists of heating at a rate of 10 K/min
up to 1060 C and subsequent cooling down at a rate of 10 K/min
to 750 C (no isothermal period).
Fig. 13 shows the conversion curves for different cycles of
manganese-iron oxide in air. The reduction step reveals good sta-
bility with only minor changes over the progression of 100 cycles
Fig. 11. Time evolution of the (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 oxidation in air at different
temperatures closer to equilibrium: symbols correspond to experimental data,
dashed lines to the prediction by the model for the effective reaction rate according
to Eq. (11).
Fig. 12. Time evolution of the (Mn0.75Fe0.25)3O4 oxidation in air at different
temperatures far from equilibrium: experimental results.
780
805
830
855
880
905
950
975
1000 1025 1050
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Reduction
Cycle
1st
5th
10th
20th
40th
60th
80th
100th
Oxidation
Conversion XOx / -
Temperature / °C
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
Conversion XRed / -
Fig. 13. Non-standardized conversion curves versus temperature of 100 redox
cycles with a heating rate of 10 K/min up to 1060 C and a cooling rate of 10 K/min
down to 750 C in air (20 mL/min O2, 80 mL/min N2), only relevant temperature
range shown.
482
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 13 =====

and is basically unaffected by cycling. It always proceeds sufﬁ-
ciently fast within approximately 6 min. Moreover, the cycles indi-
cate stable onset temperatures for the subsequent oxidation step,
respectively. Only a small increase of the reaction time is observed
over the ﬁrst 40 cycles, which is why in this range the material can
be considered fairly stable in reactivity. In the course of consecu-
tive cycling, though, longer reaction times occur in the oxidation
step, which is indicated by a shift of the end of the reaction to
lower temperatures during cooling. The oxidation still proceeds
completely during all cycles until the preset lower temperature
limit of 750 C is reached.
It has to be noted, however, that the granular particles exhibit a
so called ‘‘swelling effect” over the course of 100 redox cycles, such
that the particle density decreased and particles gained approxi-
mately double the initial size. Images of the granular raw material
in comparison to the swollen granules after 100 cycles are pre-
sented as insets in Fig. 14 (b) and (d), respectively. A similar swel-
ling behavior has previously been described for pure iron oxide
particles of 400600 lm over the course of repeated Fe2O3-Fe3O4
cycling in the ﬁeld of chemical-looping combustion. The authors
pointed out that the increased porosity results in more fragile par-
ticles, unable to withstand impacts and more susceptible to frag-
mentation (Brown et al., 2012). An increase in the porosity over
the course of 41 consecutive reduction-oxidation cycles has also
been reported for manganese-iron oxide particles of 125–180 lm
(80/20 wt.% Mn3O4/Fe2O3) in the research ﬁeld of CLOU (Shulman
et al., 2009). This ‘‘swelling effect” is critical for a future TCS appli-
cation of the material and needs to be further addressed. The addi-
tion of inert additives could be a potential solution, which in turn
reduces the speciﬁc energy density of the material though. For
instance, Azimi et al. added inert ZrO2 as a promising support
material for a manganese-iron oxide in CLOU, also utilizing a Fe/
Mn molar ratio of 1:3. The authors were able to prove an increase
of the mechanical stability of the material (Azimi et al., 2014).
The interrelation between the redox reactivity and the mor-
phology of the metal oxide particles before and after thermal
cycling are of particular interest, as morphology alterations due
to sintering processes belong to the most critical factors for the
perpetuation of the redox durability over innumerous cycles. Scan-
ning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken with a Zeiss
Ultra 55 scanning electron microscope in order to examine the
microstructure of the material. Fig. 14 (a) and (c) show the topview
of a granule, respectively. While the starting material features
irregularly shaped grains of various sizes having an angular and
sharp structure to some extent (see Fig. 14a), the SEM image of
the material cycled 100 times in the scope of the experimental
study clearly reveals larger, coherent bulk structures with sinter
neck formation between individual grains (see Fig. 14c). Those sin-
tering processes are evoked by the severe high-temperature condi-
tions up to 1060 C and might be responsible for the discovered
slight decrease in the re-oxidation rate over continuous cycling.
Representative SEM images of polished granule cross sections
are also shown in Fig. 14 to compare the porosity of the raw mate-
rial (b) and the material cycled 100 times (d). The granular parti-
cles were inﬁltrated with epoxy glue to stabilize the structure.
Dark areas (epoxy glue) represent the voidage of the particles.
Although the material is affected by sintering phenomena due to
the exposition to temperatures up to 1060 C, pore sizes and total
pore volume (porosity) of the structure increase signiﬁcantly over
the period of the cycling procedure in comparison to the raw mate-
rial, as the SEM image of the cycled material clearly shows less
solid fraction (grey areas) per image section. The particle density
decreases accordingly. This can be attributed to the swelling of
the granules and is therefore in accordance with the visual obser-
vation
of
the
immense
growth
in
granule
size
(insets
in
Fig. 14b and d). Due to those structural alterations of the material,
the mechanical properties and structural integrity of the granules
could not be thoroughly sustained.
As the binary oxide serves as a reference material, the durability
of the material to keep up the redox reactivity over numerous con-
secutive cycles can be considered sufﬁcient for the fundamental
examinations within the presented study as well as for an upscal-
ing to laboratory-scale experiments, in order to derive the main
inﬂuencing factors on the TCS concept based on metal oxide redox
Fig. 14. Scanning electron micrographs: Granulate surface and microsection of manganese-iron oxide as prepared (a and b) as well as after 100 cycles (c and d), both
materials being in the oxidized state; SEM images (b) and (d) show polished cross sections of granules with epoxy glue (dark areas) and solid particle fraction (grey areas);
working distance: 8.0 mm; acceleration voltage: 5.0 kV; pictures of the granules are shown as insets (b and d).
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
483


===== Page 14 =====

reactions. The observed ‘‘swelling effect” as well as the slight
decline of the re-oxidation rate deﬁnitely need to be tackled and
inhibited in potential future large scale applications. Therefore, fur-
ther material modiﬁcations by means of the addition of inert sup-
port materials to enhance the mechanical stability and inhibit the
‘‘swelling” of the granules upon cycling is currently under
examination.
4. Conclusions
Metal oxides are predestined for thermochemical energy stor-
age in high temperature processes such as central tower CSP
plants. The main focus is directed on using air simultaneously as
HTF and source of the reactant oxygen, allowing an open loop stor-
age operation with direct solid-gas heat transfer. Due to the high
degree of thermal energy stored as sensible heat a hybrid storage
concept in the form of a regenerator-type storage system with a
reactive TCS zone in the upper part and a non-reactive zone in
the lower part, merely used for sensible thermal energy storage,
is envisaged. In the present paper the reversible redox reaction of
a granular manganese-iron oxide with a Fe/Mn molar ratio of 1:3
has been systematically investigated by simultaneous thermal
analysis with regard to thermochemical energy storage, arriving
at the following conclusions:
 The material was prepared from technical grade raw materials
and therefore meets the requirements on the material proper-
ties to be economical and non-toxic in handling. A speciﬁc reac-
tion enthalpy of 271 J/g (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 storage material was
obtained in this work, which is higher than the energy density
of the system Mn2O3-Mn3O4-O2.
 The investigations revealed the presence of a large thermal hys-
teresis under the chosen dynamic measurement conditions,
thermally decoupling the reduction and oxidation step. The
thermal hysteresis can mainly be attributed to the occurrence
of severe kinetic limitations in the oxidation reaction close to
equilibrium. Corresponding pO2-T correlations for the reduction
and oxidation step, specifying technically relevant temperature
threshold conditions for the reactivity of the storage material at
different oxygen partial pressures, have been experimentally
determined.
 The redox reactivity of the reduction and oxidation has been
examined in a wide temperature and partial pressure range to
get a better understanding of the material behavior, which is
crucial for the operation of the TCS reactor. Overall, kinetic
and thermodynamic inﬂuences on the reaction rates were
derived. The effective reaction rate models developed for the
reduction
and
oxidation
step
(oxidation
model
valid
for
T  800 C, closer to equilibrium) adequately describe the
experimental data.
 The cycling stability of the material could be fairly maintained
in terms of the reversibility and reactivity of the material
throughout 100 dynamic redox cycles in air, verifying its good
potential for the use as TCS material. However, the morphology
of the particles changes in the course of 100 cycles.
Additionally, the general scientiﬁc ﬁndings obtained as well as
the general methodology pursued in the current study can be
equally implemented for similar cases of TCS applications.
References
Agraﬁotis, C., Roeb, M., Sattler, C., 2016. Exploitation of thermochemical cycles
based on solid oxide redox systems for thermochemical storage of solar heat.
Part 4: Screening of oxides for use in cascaded thermochemical storage
concepts. Sol. Energy 139, 695–710.
Agraﬁotis,
C.,
Roeb,
M.,
Schmücker,
M.,
Sattler,
C.,
2014.
Exploitation
ofthermochemical
cycles
based
on
solid
oxide
redox
systems
for
thermochemical storage of solar heat. Part 1: testing of cobalt oxide-based
powders. Sol. Energy 102, 189–211.
Alonso, E., Hutter, C., Romero, M., Steinfeld, A., Gonzalez-Aguilar, J., 2013. Kinetics of
Mn2O3–Mn3O4
and
Mn3O4–MnO
redox
reactions
performed
under
concentrated thermal radiative ﬂux. Energy Fuels 27, 4884–4890.
André, L., Abanades, S., Flamant, G., 2016. Screening of thermochemical systems
based on solid-gas reversible reactions for high temperature solar thermal
energy storage. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 64, 703–715.
Ávila-Marín, A.L., 2011. Volumetric receivers in solar thermal power plants with
central receiver system technology: a review. Sol. Energy 85, 891–910.
Azimi, G., Leion, H., Mattisson, T., Rydén, M., Snijkers, F., Lyngfelt, A., 2014. Mn-Fe
oxides with support of MgAl2O4, CeO2, ZrO2 and Y2O3-ZrO2 for chemical-looping
combustion and chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling. Ind. Eng. Chem.
Res. 53, 10358–10365.
Azimi, G., Leion, H., Rydén, M., Mattisson, T., Lyngfelt, A., 2013. Investigation of
different Mn-Fe oxides as oxygen carrier for chemical-looping with oxygen
uncoupling (CLOU). Energy Fuels 27, 367–377.
Barin, I., Platzki, G., 1995. Thermochemical Data of Pure Substances, third ed., VCH
Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Weinheim.
Block, T., Schmücker, M., 2016. Metal oxides for thermochemical energy storage: a
comparison of several metal oxide systems. Sol. Energy 126, 195–207.
Botas, J.A., Marugán, J., Molina, R., Herradón, C., 2012. Kinetic modelling of the ﬁrst
step of Mn2O3/MnO thermochemical cycle for solar hydrogen production. Int. J.
Hydrogen Energy 37, 18661–18671.
Brown, T.A., Scala, F., Scott, S.A., Dennis, J.S., Salatino, P., 2012. The attrition
behaviour of oxygen-carriers under inert and reacting conditions. Chem. Eng.
Sci. 71, 449–467.
Carrillo, A.J., Sastre, D., Serrano, D.P., Pizarro, P., Coronado, J.M., 2016a. Revisiting the
BaO2/BaO redox cycle for solar thermochemical energy storage. Phys. Chem.
Chem. Phys. 18, 8039–8048.
Carrillo, A.J., Serrano, D.P., Pizarro, P., Coronado, J.M., 2014. Thermochemical heat
storage based on the Mn2O3/Mn3O4 redox couple: inﬂuence of the initial
particle size on the morphological evolution and cyclability. J. Mater. Chem. A 2,
19435–19443.
Carrillo, A.J., Serrano, D.P., Pizarro, P., Coronado, J.M., 2015. Improving the
thermochemical energy storage performance of the Mn2O3/Mn3O4 redox
couple by the incorporation of iron. Chemsuschem 8, 1947–1954.
Carrillo, A.J., Serrano, D.P., Pizarro, P., Coronado, J.M., 2016b. Understanding redox
kinetics of iron-doped manganese oxides for high temperature thermochemical
energy storage. J. Phys. Chem. C 120, 27800–27812.
Clayton, C.K., Sohn, H.Y., Whitty, K.J., 2014. Oxidation kinetics of Cu2O in oxygen
carriers for chemical looping with oxygen uncoupling. Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 53,
2976–2986.
Crum, J.V., Riley, B.J., Vienna, J.D., 2009. Binary phase diagram of the manganese
oxide–iron oxide system. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 92, 2378–2384.
Friedman, H.L., 1964. Kinetics of thermal degradation of char-forming plastics from
thermogravimetry. Application to a phenolic plastic. J. Polym. Sci. Part C: Polym.
Symp. 6, 183–195.
Galwey, A., Brown, M., 1999. Thermal Decomposition of Ionic Solids, ﬁrst ed.,
Elsevier Science B.V, Amsterdam.
Gotor, F.J., Criado, J.M., Malek, J., Koga, N., 2000. Kinetic analysis of solid-state
reactions: the universality of master plots for analyzing isothermal and
nonisothermal experiments. J. Phys. Chem. A 104, 10777–10782.
Hemminger, W.F., Cammenga, H.K., 1989. Methoden der Thermischen Analyse.
Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.
Ho, C.K., 2017. Advances in central receivers for concentrating solar applications.
Sol. Energy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.03.048 (in press, corrected
proof).
Höhne, G.W.H., Cammenga, H.K., Eysel, W., Gmelin, E., Hemminger, W., 1990. The
temperature calibration of scanning calorimeters. Thermochim. Acta 160, 1–12.
Kjellqvist, L., Selleby, M., 2010. Thermodynamic assessment of the Fe-Mn-O system.
J. Phase Equilibr. Diffus. 31, 113–134.
Liu, M., Steven Tay, N.H., Bell, S., Belusko, M., Jacob, R., Will, G., Saman, W., Bruno, F.,
2016. Review on concentrating solar power plants and new developments in
high temperature thermal energy storage technologies. Renew. Sustain. Energy
Rev. 53, 1411–1432.
Muan, A., Somiya, S., 1962. The system iron oxide-manganese oxide in air. Am. J. Sci.
260, 230–240.
Muroyama, A.P., Schrader, A.J., Loutzenhiser, P.G., 2015. Solar electricity via an Air
Brayton cycle with an integrated two-step thermochemical cycle for heat
storage based on Co3O4/CoO redox reactions II: Kinetic analyses. Sol. Energy
122, 409–418.
Pardo, P., Deydier, A., Anxionnaz-Minvielle, Z., Rougé, S., Cabassud, M., Cognet, P.,
2014. A review on high temperature thermochemical heat energy storage.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 32, 591–610.
Pfenninger, S., Gauche, P., Lilliestam, J., Damerau, K., Wagner, F., Patt, A., 2014.
Potential for concentrating solar power to provide baseload and dispatchable
power. Nat. Clim. Change 4, 689–692.
Ron, M., 1999. The normalized pressure dependence method for the evaluation of
kinetic rates of metal hydride formation/decomposition. J. Alloys Compd. 283,
178–191.
Rydén, M., Leion, H., Mattisson, T., Lyngfelt, A., 2014. Combined oxides as oxygen-
carrier material for chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling. Appl. Energy
113, 1924–1932.
484
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485


===== Page 15 =====

Schaube, F., Koch, L., Wörner, A., Müller-Steinhagen, H., 2012. A thermodynamic and
kinetic
study
of
the
de-
and
rehydration
of
Ca(OH)2
at
high
H2O
partial pressures for thermo-chemical heat storage. Thermochim. Acta 538, 9–
20.
Shao, H., Nagel, T., Roßkopf, C., Linder, M., Wörner, A., Kolditz, O., 2013. Non-
equilibrium thermo-chemical heat storage in porous media: Part 2 – a 1D
computational model for a calcium hydroxide reaction system. Energy 60, 271–
282.
Shulman, A., Cleverstam, E., Mattisson, T., Lyngfelt, A., 2009. Manganese/iron,
manganese/nickel, and manganese/silicon oxides used in chemical-looping
with oxygen uncoupling (CLOU) for combustion of methane. Energy Fuels 23,
5269–5275.
Ströhle, S., Haselbacher, A., Jovanovic, Z.R., Steinfeld, A., 2016. The effect of the gas-
solid contacting pattern in a high-temperature thermochemical energy storage
on the performance of a concentrated solar power plant. Energy Environ. Sci. 9,
1375–1389.
Vyazovkin, S., Burnham, A.K., Criado, J.M., Pérez-Maqueda, L.A., Popescu, C.,
Sbirrazzuoli,
N.,
2011.
ICTAC
Kinetics
Committee
recommendations
for
performing kinetic computations on thermal analysis data. Thermochim. Acta
520, 1–19.
Vyazovkin, S., Chrissaﬁs, K., Di Lorenzo, M.L., Koga, N., Pijolat, M., Roduit, B.,
Sbirrazzuoli, N., Suñol, J.J., 2014. ICTAC Kinetics Committee recommendations
for collecting experimental thermal analysis data for kinetic computations.
Thermochim. Acta 590, 1–23.
Weiland, R., 2002. Untersuchung zur Thermodynamik oxidischer Lösungsphasen im
System Co-Fe-Mn-O Dissertation. Faculty of Chemistry, University of Stuttgart,
Stuttgart.
Wentworth, W.E., Chen, E., 1976. Simple thermal decomposition reactions for
storage of solar thermal energy. Sol. Energy 18, 205–214.
Wickham, D.G., 1969. The chemical composition of spinels in the system Fe3O4-
Mn3O4. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 31, 313–320.
Wong, B., 2011. Thermochemical heat storage for concentrated solar power: Phase
II Final Report GA-C27137 prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy. General
Atomics, San Diego, CA, USA.
Wong, B., Brown, L., Schaube, F., Tamme, R., Sattler, C., Oxide based thermochemical
heat storage, 16th SolarPACES Conference, Perpignan, France, 2010.
Zanganeh, G., Pedretti, A., Zavattoni, S., Barbato, M., Steinfeld, A., 2012. Packed-bed
thermal storage for concentrated solar power – pilot-scale demonstration and
industrial-scale design. Sol. Energy 86, 3084–3098.
Zunft, S., Hänel, M., Krüger, M., Dreißigacker, V., Göhring, F., Wahl, E., 2011. Jülich
solar power tower – experimental evaluation of the storage subsystem and
performance calculation. J. Sol.Energy Eng. 133, 031019-1–031019-5.
M. Wokon et al. / Solar Energy 153 (2017) 471–485
485
