

===== Page 1 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
Available online 15 October 2021
0254-0584/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Investigation of reactive perovskite materials for solar fuel production via 
two-step redox cycles: Thermochemical activity, thermodynamic properties 
and reduction kinetics 
Anita Haeussler a, Anne Julbe b, St´ephane Abanades a,* 
a Processes, Materials and Solar Energy Laboratory, CNRS-PROMES, 7 Rue Du Four Solaire, 66120, Font-Romeu, France 
b Institut Europ´een des Membranes, IEM, UMR-5635, ENSCM, CNRS, Univ Montpellier, Place Eug`ene Bataillon, 34095, Montpellier cedex 5, France   
H I G H L I G H T S  
G R A P H I C A L  A B S T R A C T  
• Solar thermochemical generation of 
synthetic fuels via two-step splitting of 
CO2 or H2O. 
• Investigation 
of 
non-stoichiometric 
perovskite materials comparing favor­
ably to ceria. 
• Manganite perovskites exhibit suitable 
redox activity, fuel production yield and 
thermal stability. 
• Thermodynamic properties determined 
from oxygen non-stoichiometry mea­
surements at given T-pO2. 
• Kinetic study revealed the increase of 
the activation energy with the reduction 
extent.  
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Thermochemical redox splitting 
Solar fuels 
Ceramic materials 
Perovskites 
Ceria 
CO2 conversion 
Hydrogen production 
A B S T R A C T   
The investigation and optimization of solar fuels production by H2O and CO2 splitting reactions using non- 
stoichiometric redox materials as oxygen carriers relies on materials-related studies. The thermochemical cy­
cles performance strongly rely on the thermodynamics and kinetics of redox reactions, as well as the chemical 
composition and morphology of the reactive redox materials commonly based on ceria and perovskites. This 
study focusses on the evaluation and selection of suitable non-stoichiometric metal oxides for two-step ther­
mochemical cycles with high fuel production yields, rapid reaction rates, and performance stability. The redox 
activities of different A- and B-site substituted perovskite materials (ABO3) were experimentally investigated 
(with A = La, Sr, Y, Ca, Ce, Pr, Sm and B = Mn, Co, Fe, Mg, Al, Ga, Cr). The reactive powders were synthesized 
via modified Pechini methods providing a porous microstructure especially suitable for thermochemical cycles, 
while their redox activity was evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis. This experimental screening highlighted 
the difficulty to combine high reduction extent (δ) achievable by the reactive material with complete re- 
oxidation extent and fast reaction rates. From the redox activity study of manganite perovskites, 
La0.5Sr0.5Mn0.9Mg0.1O3 (LSMMg) was pointed out as a good compromise between CO2 splitting activity and 
thermal stability, possibly competing with ceria as a promising material for two-step thermochemical cycles. 
Both thermodynamic and kinetic studies were also performed to provide a better understanding of the mecha­
nisms involved in thermochemical cycles. Thermodynamic properties derived from experimental δ(T,pO2) 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: stephane.abanades@promes.cnrs.fr (S. Abanades).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Materials Chemistry and Physics 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/matchemphys 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2021.125358 
Received 2 February 2021; Received in revised form 19 July 2021; Accepted 14 October 2021   


===== Page 2 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
2
diagrams were used to predict the upper bounds for both reduction extent and fuel production performance at 
equilibrium. Regarding kinetics, the activation energy during LSMMg reduction was shown to increase with the 
increase of the non-stoichiometry extent.   
1. Introduction 
A main challenge for two-step thermochemical cycles is to develop a 
reactive material able to dissociate water and/or CO2 with fast reaction 
rate and performance stability over cycles. To be useable in solar-driven 
thermochemical cycles, a reactive material should thus satisfy most of 
the following criteria:  
• favorable 
thermodynamics 
for 
low 
reduction 
temperature 
(<1400 ◦C);  
• capacity to produce high amounts of H2 and/or CO during the 
oxidation step;  
• fast kinetic rate;  
• good thermal stability;  
• low cost, non-toxicity, and largely available and abundant [1,2]. 
Typical redox-active materials used in thermochemical splitting are 
metal oxides based on either volatile (e.g. ZnO/Zn and SnO2/SnO [3,4]) 
or non-volatile stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric redox pairs, 
involving spinel and fluorite-structured redox materials (CeO2/CeO2-δ 
[5,6], CeO2/Ce2O3 [7], Fe3O4/FeO [8], and ferrites [9–11] such as 
NiFe2O4 [12]). More exhaustive lists of relevant material formulations 
can be found in the literature [13–16]. Recently, non-stoichiometric 
ceramics with ABO3-δ perovskite structure have attracted significant 
attention, thanks to their suitable redox properties, durability and reli­
ability at high processing temperatures. More specifically, perovskite 
oxides arose as a promising class of materials for thermochemical cycles, 
due to the large range of reachable non-stoichiometry along with their 
stability over a large range of operating conditions. Unlike ceria, ther­
modynamics are not favorable to complete re-oxidation for most of 
perovskite materials, and either a large temperature swing between 
reduction and oxidation steps or an excess of oxidant is usually required 
to increase the fuel production rate [17]. However, the large amount of 
doping possibilities in perovskite materials offers great potential for 
tuning their thermodynamic properties. Perovskite formulations such as 
La0.5Ca0.5MnO3 (LCM) and La0.5Sr0.5MnO3 (LSM) with or without any 
dopant have been tested for either H2O or CO2 splitting [18–24]. 
Insertion of aluminum in B-site was found to increase both H2 produc­
tion and reaction kinetics, with stable production rate after 80 cycles 
[25]. The insertion of Ga in B-site (limited to 30% due to its low solu­
bility) was found to increase the tolerance factor, with beneficial in­
fluence on the reduction rate [26]. Nair and Abanades [27] pointed out 
that Mg as dopant in B-site does not increase the fuel production rate but 
improves thermal stability. A detailed overview of the best performing 
perovskite formulations, with a special focus on their ability to produce 
solar fuel with high yield and stable performance was published by 
Haeussler et al. [15]. Doping strategies in perovskite materials represent 
a pathway to overpass the thermochemical performance of the current 
state-of-the-art ceria material. Broadly speaking, the search for per­
forming reactive materials should aim to decrease the reduction step 
temperature and the temperature swing between steps, while optimizing 
the reduction and re-oxidation extents and enhancing the kinetics. 
However, a trade-off between reduction and re-oxidation performance is 
usually necessary. Other important criteria include non-toxicity, avail­
ability of the resource and environmental impact of material pro­
duction/shaping. Other tools such as density functional theory can be 
useful to orient the choice of oxygen carriers. A detailed experimental 
study is also required to select the reactive materials and validate their 
applicability for thermochemical cycles. In light of the available data on 
the redox materials investigated so far, the most promising compositions 
were selected to study experimentally their redox activity. 
This study aims to present an experimental screening of promising 
materials compositions in order to identify suitable redox systems for 
thermochemical cycles. First, the impact of various dopants on ther­
mochemical performance has been investigated on a series of powders 
prepared by Pechini-derived synthesis methods. The investigated ma­
terials encompass Ca and Sr-based lanthanum-manganese perovskites, 
Sm and Pr-based strontium-manganese perovskites, lanthanum-cobalt 
perovskites, yttrium-manganese perovskites, barium-manganese perov­
skites, and ceria-based oxides. The redox behavior of the powders was 
studied in two-step cycles. The purpose was both to investigate new 
formulations and to corroborate (or invalidate) results reported by other 
studies on whether the dopants do enhance the thermochemical per­
formance of the considered perovskites. The most promising materials 
were finally selected to perform thermodynamic and kinetic studies 
based on thermogravimetric analyses in order to provide better under­
standing of the mechanisms involved in thermochemical cycles. The 
thermodynamic analysis was used to predict the theoretical perfor­
mance of the oxygen carrier materials and can be wisely applied to pre- 
select potential reactive materials. Such a thermodynamic study does 
not include any practical considerations such as kinetic limitations or 
sintering effects. It was thus completed by a kinetic study. The latter 
provided essential information and better understanding about reaction 
mechanisms and durations, which are key parameters for reactor design 
and large-scale implementation. In this work, the kinetic and thermo­
dynamic characteristics of redox reactions were extensively probed. 
Both Ca0.5Sr0.5MnO3 (CSM) and La0.5Sr0.5Mn0.9Mg0.1O3 (LSMMg) were 
selected as benchmark materials to illustrate the thermodynamic equi­
librium approach. CSM was previously considered as a ceria membrane 
coating to boost oxygen exchange [28], while LSMMg was used to 
promote fuel production capacity of ceria foams [29]. The kinetic study 
of LSMMg further revealed an evolution of the activation energy as a 
function of the reduction extent during the reduction reaction, which 
was never investigated before. 
2. Materials and method 
2.1. Materials synthesis 
The perovskite powders were synthesized by Pechini-derived 
methods [30,31] based on the utilization of nitrate metal salts (M), 
citric acid (CA) as a chelating agent, and ethylene glycol (EG) as a 
complexing agent. Two different solution formulations with the 
following molar ratios: M:CA:EG = 1:1.5:1 (P1 method) and M:CA:EG =
1:5:20 (P2 method) have been applied. In a typical synthesis, a given 
quantity of metal nitrates was dissolved in water with the fixed M:H2O 
mass ratio of 1:6. 
LSM powders (with or without Mg or Al dopant) were first prepared 
by the P1 method. The mixture of nitrate salts and CA (CA:M = 1.5:1) 
was heated to 60 ◦C and stirred for 10 min. Then, EG was added to the 
solution with the molar ratio EG:CA = 0.66:1. 
In parallel, LSM and LCM powders were prepared by P2 method, in 
which large excess of CA was added to the metal salts solution (CA:M =
5:1). The mixture was heated to 60 ◦C and stirred for 10 min. Then, a 
large excess of EG was added to the solution with the molar ratio EG:CA 
= 4:1. It was highlighted that large excess in citrate agent (P2-method) 
leads to increased powder sinterability [24], which can be suitable to 
realize dense layers. In contrast, the P1-method was found relevant to 
synthesize reactive materials with low sinterability, yielding stable 
performance in two-step thermochemical cycles. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 3 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
3
For both methods, the final mixture was heated to 120 ◦C until a 
viscous colored sol was obtained, which was further heated to 250 ◦C for 
2 h to form a polymeric resin (polyesterification step). The as-obtained 
resin was crushed using an agate mortar and subsequently treated in 
successive thermal treatment steps in air atmosphere: i) 600 ◦C for 1 h 
with a 3 ◦C/min ramp yielding a porous ceramic powder, ii) 1400 ◦C for 
1 h with a 5 ◦C/min ramp, yielding the final perovskite material which 
was used in two-step thermochemical CO2 splitting reactions. All sample 
references, corresponding formulations, and synthesis methods are re­
ported in Table S1. 
2.2. Characterization methods 
The main physico-chemical characteristics (morphology, chemical 
composition, crystalline structure, and microstructure) of the P1 and P2 
powders were determined and compared. The powders morphology and 
grain sizes were observed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Micro­
scopy (FESEM – Hitachi S4800). 
The crystallographic structure of the investigated powders was 
analyzed at room temperature by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a 
PANalytical XPert Pro diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, λ = 0.15418 
nm). A 20–75◦angular range was used with θ-θ symmetrical scan. X-ray 
diffractograms were recorded and analyzed with PANalytical softwares 
(Data collector and HighScorePlus). All the collected XRD patterns are 
presented in Supplementary Material. 
Particle size distributions were measured by laser diffraction (Mas­
tersizer 3000) coupled with a fluid dispersion system (Hydro EV). The 
system was operated at two wavelengths (633 nm and 470 nm). Ultra­
sounds were used to operate powder dispersion in water and particle 
size distribution was determined by applying the Fraunhofer diffraction 
theory [32]. 
The thermochemical CO2 splitting reactivity of the powders prepared 
at 1400 ◦C was studied via thermogravimetric analysis (TGA – 
SETARAM SETSYS) using a platinum crucible. Around 100 mg of pow­
der was used for each TGA experiment. The temperature was first 
increased to 1400 ◦C (20 ◦C/min) under argon (99.999% purity, < 2 
ppm of O2, 0.020 NL/min) to perform the thermal reduction step. After 
45 min plateau at 1400 ◦C, the temperature was decreased to 1050 ◦C 
(20 ◦C/min). An equimolar mixture of CO2 and Ar was then introduced 
(0.010 NL/min for each) in the system to perform the oxidation step, 
during 60 min. Then the temperature was increased again to 1400 ◦C 
under argon, and the thermal reduction and CO2 splitting reaction cycle 
was operated again. The mass variation due to oxygen release during the 
thermal reduction step and oxygen uptake during the CO2 splitting step 
was recorded continuously, and the amounts of O2 and CO produced 
were calculated [23]. Specific H2O splitting tests were also performed in 
a tubular furnace with online O2 and H2 analysis (Fig. S1). 
For the thermodynamic study, different temperature dwells (ranging 
from 1000 to 1400 ◦C) were carried out in TGA at different oxygen 
partial pressures (from 10 to 10000 ppm) to determine the δ(T,pO2) di­
agrams. Regarding kinetic analysis, the reduction in Ar up to 1400 ◦C 
was carried out under different heating rates (non-isothermal tests) to 
determine both the conversion rate and δ values as a function of the 
temperature. 
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Influence of chemical composition and dopants on the redox activity 
A series of promising materials and dopants was investigated for 
thermochemical cycles application. All the selected reactive composi­
tions are reported in Table S1, along with their abbreviations. The 
selected material compositions were synthesized with a modified 
Pechini method, and their crystallographic structure was determined by 
XRD analysis. The redox behavior of powder series was investigated via 
TGA (gas yields are reported in Table S2), and their structural stability 
was assessed via XRD analysis after thermochemical cycles, in order to 
detect any evolution of crystallographic phases. FESEM was also applied 
to analyze the microstructure of powders and their morphological evo­
lution. Finally, the most promising formulations were selected for 
further thermodynamic and kinetic studies. 
3.1.1. Ca and Sr-based lanthanum manganese perovskites (A- and B-sites 
substituted) 
Lanthanum manganite perovskites have been investigated for 
numerous applications such as electrodes in solid oxide fuel cells [33], 
metal-air batteries [34], gas and ion sensors [35,36] or high perfor­
mance materials for catalysis [37]. Addition of Ca has been considered 
to achieve high reduction extent [21,22]. Lanthanum-strontium 
manganite perovskites have been investigated for applications in mi­
croelectrodes [38]. For two-step thermochemical cycles, Sr-based and 
Ca-based lanthanum manganite perovskites have been widely studied 
[39]. However, their low re-oxidation extent is an issue. Thus, to 
enhance the thermochemical performance, different dopants were 
selected on the basis of their promising behavior reported in the liter­
ature: Al, Cr, Ga, and Mg. The following perovskites were investigated in 
this work: La0.5A0.5Mn0.6Al0.4O3, La0.5A0.5Mn0.6Cr0.4O3, La0.5A0.5M­
n0.6Al0.2Cr0.2O3, La0.5A0.5Mn0.8Ga0.2O3, and La0.5A0.5Mn0.9Mg0.1O3. The 
La0.5A0.5MnO3 materials were used as references (with A = Sr, Ca). A 
comparative study was performed to elucidate the influence of the 
modified-Pechini method parameters and of the dopants on the reac­
tivity of the derived powders. The crystallographic structure of the 
considered material series was studied by XRD analysis (Figs. S2–S3). All 
the LSM powders exhibit a cubic phase, with lattice parameter a in the 
range 3.840–3.864 Å. The LCM powders exhibit an orthorhombic phase 
with lattice parameter a in the range 5.346–5.431 Å, b in the range 
5.362–5.432 Å, and c in the range 7.593–7.688 Å. 
In a previous work [24], the characteristics of powders prepared by 
P1 and P2 modified-Pechini methods were investigated to select the 
most adapted protocols yielding perovskite formulations and micro­
structures with both suitable sinterability (depending on the targeted 
application involving either porous microstructures or densified mem­
branes) and attractive CO2 splitting performance. Dilatometric results 
clearly evidenced that P1-powders offer low sinterability and densifi­
cation below 1400 ◦C, whereas P2-powders show enhanced sintering at 
this point [24]. The P2 powders were easily shaped as pellets and their 
sintering was controllable up to strong densification at about 1400 ◦C. In 
contrast, the P1 powders were found to present heterogeneities and a 
spongy microstructure due to combustion reactions during their syn­
thesis [40]. 
A comparison of the redox activity of both P1 and P2-powders (LSM, 
LSMMg, and LSMAl) for CO2 splitting reaction reveals similar fuel pro­
duction yield during two-step thermochemical cycles (Table S2). The 
highest CO amount (215–217 μmol/g) is produced by LSMMg with an 
almost complete re-oxidation yield for both P1 and P2 powders (97%), 
thereby confirming cycling stability. For all samples, the CO production 
yield during the first and second cycles is similar. 
Fig. 1 compares the O2 and CO production yields obtained from TGA 
for the series of Sr and Ca-based perovskites (data from Ref. [24]). The 
reduction extent reached during the first cycle is enhanced by Al3+ and 
Mg2+ dopants in comparison with LSM and LCM reference perovskites. 
On the contrary, the reduction step is not improved by Ga3+ and Al/Cr 
dopants, and the Cr dopant is even unfavorable. The O2 production starts 
at 800 ◦C for all the Sr-based perovskite series, against 900 ◦C for the 
Ca-based perovskites, except for LCMAl with a start at 650 ◦C unveiling a 
lower reduction enthalpy. This explains the higher reduction extent 
reached by LCMAl in comparison with other Ca-based perovskites. 
Concerning the oxidation step of Ca-based perovskites, only LCMGa 
offers higher CO production yield in comparison with LCM, but re- 
oxidation extent is low (below 60%). The other dopants (Al, Cr, and 
Mg) negatively impact the amount of CO produced. For Sr-based pe­
rovskites, the Mg2+, Ga3+ and Al3+ dopants lead to an enhancement of 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 4 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
4
the CO production yield in comparison with LSM. The CO production 
yields obtained during the first and the second cycles are similar, con­
firming the thermochemical stability of the perovskite series. The re- 
oxidation extents reached during the second cycles are above 90%, 
except for Al/Cr that only reaches 83% due to its low CO production 
yield. Therefore, apart from Cr and Cr/Al3+ dopants, Ga3+, Al3+ and 
Mg2+ are able to enhance LSM performance. In this series, LSMMg seems 
to be the most promising material since it offers both the highest CO 
production yield and enhanced performance stability. 
TGA thus points out the promising redox behavior of LSMMg. In 
order to further provide insights into the thermochemical reactions of 
LSMMg, two thermochemical H2O splitting cycles were carried out in an 
electric tubular furnace (Fig. S1), with ~0.8 g of reactive material. The 
system permits to directly analyze the O2 and H2 gas produced at the 
outlet, thus yielding production rate values (Fig. 2). The reduction step 
was performed at 1400 ◦C after a heating ramp of 10 ◦C/min, with an Ar 
flow rate of 0.2 NL/min. The oxidation step was performed at 1050 ◦C 
for 40 min under 50% of H2O. The O2 and H2 production yields obtained 
with the tubular furnace were in the same order of magnitude than the 
O2 and CO production yields measured by TGA (207 μmol/g against 269 
μmol/g for O2, and 236 μmol/g for H2 against 215 μmol/g for CO, in 
tubular furnace and TGA, respectively). In the 2nd cycle, O2 and H2 
yields were 123 and 251 μmol/g, confirming complete re-oxidation. The 
oxygen production rate increased with the increase of temperature and 
reached a peak value at the target temperature. Then, the O2 production 
decreased slowly until reaching a sufficiently low production rate value 
and the temperature was then decreased for the oxidation step. The H2 
production rate reached a peak few seconds after steam injection and 
then slowly decreased. This fits the kinetic studies reported for perov­
skites in the literature [18,41]. The H2 production rate reached a 
maximum value of 0.31 mL/min/g during both cycles, denoting good 
production stability for LSMMg-P1. These results demonstrate that 
LSMMg is able to split both CO2 and H2O with similar performance. 
To explain the good thermochemical performance of LSMMg-P1, its 
microstructure was observed by FESEM. Fig. 3 presents the micrographs 
of LSMMg-P1 powder before and after redox cycles in TGA. The spongy 
microstructure results from nitrate decomposition during Pechini syn­
thesis. Such a morphology is typical for powders obtained by combus­
tion reactions [40]. Grain sizes were measured in the range 0.5–1 μm. 
Furthermore, the two thermochemical cycles performed in TGA did not 
induce any sintering, as confirmed by the limited grain growth. The 
presence of Mg2+ ion as stabilizer in the perovskite structure could 
explain this behavior. Indeed, the strong Mg–O bond, resulting in high 
melting temperature for MgO (2800 ◦C), could explain its good thermal 
resistance [20]. Thermal resistance is a key asset for further process 
implementation, as the reactive material should undergo multiple cycles 
while maintaining stable performance. Thus, LSMMg-P1 appears as a 
promising candidate for this purpose. 
The grain size distribution is another important characteristic of the 
reactive powder, with direct influence on its specific surface area. 
Indeed, a high specific surface area promotes gas production rate during 
the surface-controlled oxidation step. The particle size distribution of 
both fresh and cycled LSMMg-P1 powders was investigated by laser 
diffraction (Fig. 4), using the Fraunhofer diffraction theory and the 
assumption of spherical particles. For the fresh sample, a bimodal dis­
tribution of particle sizes is observed with two maximums centered at 
Fig. 1. Influence of dopants on O2 and CO production yields, and re-oxidation extent (2nd cycle) for series of Ca and Sr-based perovskites.  
Fig. 2. O2 and H2 production rates during two consecutive thermochemical 
cycles for H2O splitting, performed in a tubular furnace with LSMMg-P1 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 5 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
5
5.9 μm and 27.4 μm. After two thermochemical cycles in TGA (CO2 
splitting), the proportion of small particles strongly decreased in favor of 
larger ones, attributed to a slight sintering effect. The two initial dis­
tributions shift, combine, and form a single distribution, centered at 
40.1 μm. In comparison with the small grain sizes (0.5–1 μm) observed 
by SEM [24], the large particle sizes measured by laser diffraction 
correspond to consolidated aggregates of grains partially sintered. It 
appears clearly in Fig. 3 that these porous aggregates are more effi­
ciently consolidated (sintered) after cycling although the size of grains 
within the aggregates remains almost unchanged. 
To sum up, Ca-doped perovskites offer higher reduction extent than 
Sr-doped perovskites. Conversely, Sr-based perovskites show higher re- 
oxidation yield than Ca-based perovskites. The use of Mg dopant in B- 
site is promising. Mg2+ is not involved in redox reactions but it enhances 
the oxidation degree of Mn (compared with Ga3+ and Al3+), thus fa­
voring both reduction and oxidation extents. Mg2+ also acts as a sin­
tering inhibitor as the LSMMg powder remains well dispersed and not 
cohesive after TGA cycling, whereas other powders tend to sinter. 
3.1.2. Sm and Pr-based strontium manganese perovskites 
Numerous studies have investigated perovskites with lanthanum in 
the A-site. In this work, other rare earth elements such as samarium or 
praseodymium were investigated instead of lanthanum in order to 
promote thermochemical performance. Five compositions were 
selected: Sm0.75Sr0.25MnO3 (SmSrM75), Sm0.5Sr0.5MnO3 (SmSrM50), 
Pr0.75Sr0.25MnO3 
(PrSrM75), 
Pr0.5Sr0.5MnO3 
(PrSrM50), 
and 
Pr0.25Sr075MnO3 (PrSrM25). The P1 method was used to synthesize the 
powder series. Their crystallographic structures were studied by XRD 
(Fig. S4). It should be noted that the synthesis of Sm0.25Sr0.75MnO3 
formulation was also attempted, but XRD analysis showed that the 
perovskite structure did not form. 
Fig. 5 shows TGA results for the strontium-manganese perovskite 
series (including LSM for comparison). First, the Sr content influences 
the non-stoichiometry extent reached by the reactive material. A high Sr 
content induces a high amount of oxygen released; for example PrSrM25 
(Pr0.25Sr075MnO3) produces 668 μmol/g of O2 against 146 μmol/g for 
PrSrM75 (Pr0.75Sr0.25MnO3). The O2 production rate is also sharply 
enhanced (Fig. S5). As highlighted in the literature, increasing the Sr 
content increases the Mn oxidation state in B-site. As the reduction re­
action depends on the reduction of Mn4+ to Mn3+, an increase of Sr 
content enhances the reduction extent [18,39,42–47]. However, 
increasing Sr content does not enhance the CO yield. For a fixed Sr 
content, the amount of O2 released depends on the Sr-substitution 
element in the A-site. With 50% Sr, the O2 production yield increases 
in the following order: LSM (232 μmol) < PrSrM50 (268 μmol/g) <
SmSrM50 (377 μmol/g). Using Sm3+ or Pr3+ in the A-site thus enhances 
the reduction step in comparison with La3+. The CO production during 
the first cycle increases in the following order: PrSrM50 (153 μmol/g) <
SmSrM50 (169 μmol/g) < LSM (190 μmol/g). The highest O2 production 
yield is obtained with PrSrM25 (668 μmol/g) whereas the highest CO 
production yield is obtained with SmSrM75 (180 μmol/g). Thus, Sm and 
Pr in A-site (instead of La) have beneficial impact on the reduction step 
but they decrease the amount of CO produced during the oxidation step, 
impeding the enhancement of thermochemical performance. However, 
Fig. 3. FESEM observations of LSMMg-P1 powder: a) and b) before cycling; c) and d) after cycling in TGA for CO2 splitting.  
Fig. 4. Particle size distribution of fresh (red) and cycled (blue) LSMMg-P1 
powder. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, 
the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.) 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 6 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
6
all the materials show very good fuel production stability and higher 
productivity than pure ceria under similar conditions [48]. 
3.1.3. Lanthanum cobalt perovskites 
Lanthanum cobalt perovskites were studied for their attractive 
magnetic properties [49] or their performance as cathode materials in 
high temperature fuel cells [50]. Due to their high oxygen exchange 
capacities, lanthanum cobalt perovskites also appear as potentially 
attractive reactive materials for thermochemical cycles. Both 
La0.5Sr0.5CoO3 (LSCo) and LaMn0.5Co0.5O3 (LMCo) were selected for 
tests in thermochemical cycles. The XRD patterns of LSCo and LMCo 
confirm the formation of the expected crystallographic structure 
(Fig. S6). Fig. S7 compares the mass variation during two thermo­
chemical cycles for LSCo and LMCo. The LSCo cycles were carried at a 
lower reduction temperature (1300 ◦C) due to the melting risk of this 
material at higher temperatures. The oxidation temperature was also 
decreased to 950 ◦C in order to maintain a similar temperature swing for 
all TGA cycling experiments. The CO production yield of LMCo was low 
(~100 μmol/g) due to the weak non-stoichiometry extent reached 
during the reduction step (δ = 0.021). On the contrary, LSCo reached a 
high reduction extent during the first cycle (1191 μmol/g) and high 
subsequent mass uptake (1141 μmol/g) despite a low re-oxidation 
extent (48%). This result was ascribed to carbonate formation, as 
denoted by the sharp mass loss observed when stopping CO2 feed (also 
evidenced in Ref. [23]), reflecting prompt decarbonation (CO2 release) 
and unsuitability for CO2 redox splitting. In a previous work in our 
group, this material was also tested for H2O splitting and low H2 pro­
duction was measured, confirming its low thermochemical splitting 
activity [43]. In addition, strong sintering or partial melting occurred in 
the crucible after TGA performed with CO2. The XRD pattern of LSCo 
after thermochemical cycles highlighted the decomposition of 
La0.5Sr0.5CoO3 to LaSrCoO4 and CoO (Fig. S6), as previously pointed out 
in Ref. [43]. 
3.1.4. Yttrium manganese perovskites 
Yttrium manganese perovskites have been widely studied for air 
separation applications due to their ability to selectively absorb, store 
and release significant amounts of oxygen [51]. The high oxygen ex­
change capacity is a key parameter for reactive materials in thermo­
chemical cycles. In this respect, series of yttrium manganese perovskites 
were investigated in this work for thermochemical CO2 splitting cycles. 
Four promising compositions were selected: Y0.97La0.03MnO3 (YLaM), 
Y0.9Ce0.1MnO3 
(YCeM), 
Y0.87Sr0.1La0.03MnO3 
(YLaSrM), 
and 
Y0.9Sr0.1MnO3 
(YSrM). 
The 
XRD 
patterns 
of 
the 
prepared 
yttrium-manganite perovskite series are shown in Fig. S8. Their struc­
tures correspond to the space group P63cm (01-070-4962). YSrM shows 
a peak shift due to the substitution of Y3+ by Sr2+ in comparison with 
YMnO3, inducing the following lattice parameters: a = 6.11 Å and c =
11.25 Å. After thermochemical cycles, the lattice parameters slightly 
increase, with a = 6.16 Å and c = 11.47 Å. Both YLaM and YCeM show 
increased lattice parameters (a = 6.16 Å and 6.21 Å; c = 11.48 Å and 
11.98 Å, respectively) in comparison with YMnO3 (a = 6.13 Å; c = 11.40 
Å). This is due to the higher ionic radii of La (1.03 Å) and Ce (1.01 Å) in 
comparison with Y (0.90 Å) [52]. Similarly to YSrM, both YLaM and 
YCeM present a decrease in lattice parameters after thermochemical 
cycles: a = 6.15 Å and c = 11.43 Å for YLaM and a = 6.20 Å and c =
11.94 Å for YCeM. 
Fig. 6 shows the mass variation during two thermochemical cycles, 
along with the O2 and CO production yields. The TGA of YCeM was 
aborted after the first cycle due to very low re-oxidation extent. A high 
mass loss was observed during the first part of the reduction step (until 
1128 ◦C) and thus, only the mass variation measured during the second 
part of the reduction step (above 1128 ◦C) was taken into account to 
calculate the oxygen yield. Among the tested yttrium manganese pe­
rovskites, YLaSrM reached the highest reduction extent with 145 μmol/g 
of O2 in comparison with 54 μmol/g, 47 μmol/g, and 127 μmol/g for 
YLaM, YCeM, and YSrM, respectively. The CO production yields fol­
lowed the same trend as the O2 production yields, suggesting that CO 
production depends on the achieved non-stoichiometry, with the 
following yields: YLaSrM (135 μmol/g) > YSrM (118 μmol/g) > YLaM 
(86 μmol/g) > YCeM (33 μmol/g). Despite its low reduction extent, 
YLaM displays high re-oxidation extent (77%) during the 1st cycle in 
comparison with YSrM (46%). Furthermore, both O2 and CO production 
yields for YSrM during the 2nd cycle are lower (106 μmol/g and 106 
μmol/g, respectively) than those of the first cycle (127 μmol/g and 118 
μmol/g, respectively). On the contrary, YLaM exhibits an increase of 
both O2 and CO production yields when comparing the first and second 
cycles (from 54 to 60 μmol/g and from 86 to 107 μmol/g, respectively). 
This can be explained by a slow reduction rate of the material. Indeed 
during the first cycle, YLaM does not reach its maximum reduction 
extent. Hence, the non-stoichiometry extent continues to increase dur­
ing the second step. Among the yttrium manganese perovskites inves­
tigated, YLaSrM offers the best performance with the highest CO 
production yield (137 μmol/g). Furthermore, the CO production yield is 
stable between the first and the second cycle, highlighting the thermo­
chemical stability of this perovskite material. The re-oxidation extent of 
YLaSrM during the second cycle reached 91%. Consequently, YLaSrM 
appears to be the most promising reactive material among the investi­
gated yttrium manganese perovskite series. 
3.1.5. Barium manganese perovskites 
Barcellos et al. identified cerium-doped barium manganese perov­
skite as a promising water-splitting material due to its appropriate ox­
ygen bonding strength [53]. In order to test this type of perovskite, 
BaCe0.5Mn0.5O3 (BaCeMn) was synthesized by the Pechini method. As 
reported in Ref. [53], a mixture of two phases BaCe0.5Mn0.5O3 and CeO2 
Fig. 5. a) Thermogravimetric reduction and re-oxidation profiles for CO2 splitting and b) O2 and CO production yields for a series of strontium manganite 
perovskites. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 7 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
7
was evidenced in the XRD patterns (Fig. S9). Two TGA cycles were 
carried out as presented in Fig. S10. During the first cycle, 220 μmol/g 
and 154 μmol/g of O2 and CO were produced, respectively. These values 
are in line with those obtained for lanthanum manganese perovskites 
[39]. However, during the second cycle, CO production yield fell to 110 
μmol/g and a poor re-oxidation yield was achieved. Such a decrease in 
performance is not consistent with the good stability highlighted by 
Barcellos et al. [53]. This may be explained by the slightly higher 
reduction temperature used here (1400 ◦C) in comparison with Barcellos 
work (1350 ◦C). Indeed, higher temperatures can induce sintering that 
may hinder the re-oxidation reaction. Furthermore, a decomposition of 
the BaCeMn structure (with formation of BaCeO3 and MnO3 phases) was 
evidenced by XRD after cycling (Fig. S9), thus explaining the degrada­
tion of thermochemical performance. For these reasons, such a formu­
lation appears unsuitable for solar thermochemical application. 
3.1.6. Ceria and doped-ceria 
Currently, ceria is considered as the state-of-art material for two-step 
thermochemical cycles, due to the stability of its crystallographic 
structure over a large range of non-stoichiometry and working condi­
tions. However, it suffers from a low reduction extent impeding high fuel 
production yield [54–57]. Numerous doping strategies have been 
explored to improve ceria thermochemical performance [48,58–60]. In 
this work, three promising compositions were selected from the litera­
ture and synthesized via Pechini method (P2): Ce0.85Zr0.15O2 (CeZr15), 
Ce0.63Zr0.37O2 (CeZr37) and Ce0.63Zr0.27Al0.1O2 (CeZr27Al10). CeO2 
was used as reference material. The formation of a fluorite structure was 
checked by XRD for all the selected formulations (Fig. S11). Fig. 7 shows 
the TGA profiles of both ceria and doped-ceria powders along with the 
O2 and CO production yields. In comparison with pure ceria, the 
doped-ceria series presents enhanced reduction extent during the first 
cycle (in the range of 116–176 μmol/g compared with 55 μmol/g for 
pristine ceria). Doping with Zr has a beneficial impact on ceria reduction 
extent: the reduction yield increases from 55 μmol/g for pure ceria to 
176 μmol/g for CeZr37. The lattice distortion induced by the incorpo­
ration of Zr4+ enhances oxygen mobility, explaining the higher O2 yield 
obtained with Zr-doped ceria [60,61]. 
The total amount of dopant in CeZr27Al10 and CeZr37 is similar 
(37%), however the O2 released by CeZr27Al10 (129 μmol/g) is 
significantly lower than the value measured for CeZr37 (176 μmol/g). 
Thus, simultaneous incorporation of both Al and Zr into ceria is not 
beneficial to the reduction extent. Concerning the oxidation step, the CO 
production yield increases in the following order: CeZr37 (72 μmol/g) <
CeO2 (95 μmol/g) ≈CeZr27Al10 (86 μmol/g) < CeZr15 (144 μmol/g). 
Doped-ceria materials offer low re-oxidation extent (in the range of 
20–62%) in comparison with pristine ceria (77%) due to slow kinetics. 
During the second cycle, CeZr37 and CeZr27Al10 show a decrease of the 
amount of CO produced (69 μmol/g and 57 μmol/g, respectively) in 
comparison with the first cycle (72 μmol/g and 86 μmol/g, respectively). 
Such a decrease in performance is attributed to the low thermal stability 
of the microstructure of these materials (synthesized via P2 method, 
favoring strong sintering and well adapted for preparing dense mem­
brane [24]), making them not suitable for consecutive cycling operation. 
Within this series, the best performing materials are thus pure ceria due 
to high re-oxidation rates, and CeZr15 due to the improved fuel pro­
ductivity (at the expense of lower oxidation rates for Zr-substituted 
ceria). When considering two-step redox cycles, the activity of ceria 
and ceria-zirconia synthesized via different methods was studied before 
[62]. The thermal stability of the microstructure of these ceria-based 
materials was enhanced when adequate synthesis methods were used 
to limit sintering, thus enhancing final CO production yields. However, 
the fuel yield relative to unit mass of ceria remains low because the 
Fig. 6. a) Thermogravimetric reduction and re-oxidation profiles with CO2 (solid lines) and associated temperatures (dashed line), b) O2 and CO production yields 
for yttrium manganite perovskite series. 
Fig. 7. a) Thermogravimetric reduction and re-oxidation profiles (solid lines) and associated temperatures (dashed line), b) O2 and CO production yields for ceria 
and doped-ceria materials. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 8 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
8
reduction extent (δ value) is limited, and most of perovkite formulations 
compete favorably with ceria in terms of reduction extent and fuel 
productivity. 
3.2. Thermodynamic study 
The determination of thermodynamic properties is interesting to 
predict both the theoretical reduction extent and the fuel production 
yield of materials. Thermodynamic properties were assessed from 
experimental measurements of oxygen non-stoichiometry δ at given T- 
pO2, for two selected materials: LSMMg-P1 (the most promising material 
studied here) and Ca0.5Sr0.5MnO3 (CSM). 
The CSM perovskite was already studied for thermochemical energy 
storage applications due to its excellent oxygen exchange capacity and 
associated heat storage capacity [63,64]. However, a re-oxidation with 
CO2 at 1050 ◦C is unsuitable to observe significant CO production. A 
re-oxidation performed during continuous temperature decrease 
revealed that the oxidation rate became more favorable when 
approaching 600 ◦C. After a reduction at 1400 ◦C under 10 ppm O2, the 
final non-stoichiometry extent reached by CSM near equilibrium led to 
an O2 production yield of 1302 μmol/g (Fig. 8a). After cooling down to 
600 ◦C in Ar, followed by CO2 injection (50%), its re-oxidation extent 
was weak (less than 20%), which highlights the need for a large tem­
perature swing to favor the oxidation step and produce significant 
amounts of CO (~350 μmol/g at 600 ◦C after a reduction plateau up to 
1400 ◦C for CSM, Fig. 8a). Similarly, Ca0.5Sr0.5Mn0.5Fe0.5O3 (CSMF) 
displays an O2 yield of 913 μmol/g at 1300 ◦C under 10 ppm O2 and a CO 
production yield of 315 μmol/g at 600 ◦C (Fig. S12). For such perov­
skites, a large temperature swing is thus required for acceptable CO 
production, which is inappropriate for rapid cycling due to the required 
heating/cooling stages between reaction steps of thermochemical cy­
cles. These results evidence very different redox behaviors for CSM and 
LSMMg materials, and it was thus particularly relevant to study and 
compare their thermodynamic properties. 
To evaluate the partial molar enthalpy and entropy as a function of 
the non-stoichiometry, the Van’t Hoff method was applied according to 
Equation (1) [65,66]. If ΔH◦(δ) and ΔS◦(δ) do not depend on the tem­
perature, as often observed, an Arrhenius plot of a set of T-pO2 pairs for a 
given δ value yields a linear curve, with the values of enthalpy and en­
tropy of reduction given by the curve slope and intercept, respectively. 
To this aim, three steps are required, as represented in Fig. 8 for CSM 
material. Firstly, thermogravimetric analyses were carried out with 
several temperature steps (1000 ◦C, 1100 ◦C, 1200 ◦C, 1300 ◦C, and 
1400 ◦C) under different values of oxygen partial pressures pO2 (10 ppm, 
250 ppm, 2000 ppm, and 10000 ppm). Fig. 8a and 8 b present the 
thermogravimetric analysis of CSM under 10 ppm O2 and 250 ppm O2, 
respectively. At the different temperatures, for all the couples (T, pO2), 
the non-stoichiometry at equilibrium δ was determined (by numerical 
extrapolation for low pO2 conditions because equilibrium is often hardly 
reached for the lowest pO2 value corresponding to 10 ppm). Secondly, 
for all the investigated pO2 values, the non-stoichiometry extent δ was 
plotted as a function of the temperature, as shown in Fig. 8c. Finally, for 
each δ value, the logarithm plot of pO2 versus the inverse temperature 
was fitted by linear regression from which the enthalpy and entropy of 
reduction were extracted using Eq. (1) (Fig. 8d). Thus, both enthalpy 
and entropy can be calculated for all the non-stoichiometry extent 
values. Likewise, the different data used to compute the thermodynamic 
properties of LSMMg are presented in Fig. 9. 
ln
(pO2
P◦
)
δ = 2ΔSo(δ)
R
−2ΔHo(δ)
RT
(1) 
The thermodynamic properties of both materials were investigated 
with calculation of their partial molar enthalpies and entropies as a 
function of oxygen non-stoichiometry (Fig. 10). The enthalpy and en­
tropy values for CeO2 and La0.5Sr0.5MnO3 (LSM) calculated by Refs. [18, 
67] were also plotted for comparison. Both LSM and LSMMg show 
similar and consistent trends because the materials have close redox 
activity, which confirms experimental data reliability. CSM features a 
large oxygen non-stoichiometry variation and an increase of entropy 
Fig. 8. a) TGA of CSM under 10 ppm O2 and b) TGA of CSM under 250 ppm O2, with successive temperature steps (heating rate of 20 ◦C/min, dwell of 45 min at each 
temperature plateau), c) non-stoichiometry extent as a function of temperature, and d) logarithm of oxygen partial pressure versus inverse temperature for CSM. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 9 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
9
and enthalpy values with the increase of non-stoichiometry (in the δ 
range 0.1–0.32 related to the experimental measurements), as also 
previously noticed for several other perovskite materials that repro­
duced a similar trend [68–72]. Fig. 11 presents the evolution of the 
Gibbs free enthalpy (ΔG) as a function of the non-stoichiometry extent 
for a temperature of 1400 ◦C under 10 ppm O2. For both CSM and 
LSMMg-P1, ΔG values constantly increase with the increase of 
non-stoichiometry. This can be explained by the fact that increasing the 
non-stoichiometry requires increasing the energy input to the reaction. 
From the knowledge of the enthalpy and entropy values, it is possible 
to determine the theoretical maximum non-stoichiometry extent for 
both the oxidation and reduction steps. In the following, both the 
reduction extent and re-oxidation yield of CSM and LSMMg in similar 
conditions than TGA (reduction at 1400 ◦C under 10 ppm O2 with a re- 
oxidation step at 1050 ◦C) are predicted thanks to the thermodynamic 
data extracted from the previous analysis. At the reaction equilibrium, 
the Gibbs free enthalpy of the reaction is null. To obtain the final non- 
stoichiometry extent (δf), the non-standard Gibbs free enthalpy needs 
to be determined as a function of non-stoichiometry. Thus, for fixed 
operating conditions, the reduction extent at equilibrium, which corre­
sponds to a null Gibbs free enthalpy, is the final reduction extent 
Fig. 9. a) TGA of LSMMg under 10 ppm O2 and b) TGA of LSMMg under 250 ppm O2 with successive temperature steps (heating rate of 20 ◦C/min, dwell of 60 min), 
c) non-stoichiometry extent as a function of temperature, and d) logarithm of oxygen partial pressure versus inverse temperature for LSMMg. 
Fig. 10. a) Enthalpy and b) entropy of reduction as a function of the oxygen 
non-stoichiometry for CSM and LSMMg. Data for CeO2 and LSM issued from 
Refs. [16,67] were also reported for comparison purpose. 
Fig. 11. Gibbs free enthalpy at 1400 ◦C under 10 ppm O2 versus the non- 
stoichiometry extent for CSM and LSMMg. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 10 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
10
obtained from Equation (2). 
ΔGo(
δf
)
= ΔHo(
δf
)
−TredΔSo(
δf
)
+ 1
2 RT ln
(pO2
P◦
)
= 0
(2) 
The values of the final oxygen non-stoichiometry of CSM and LSMMg 
after the reduction step thus derive from the vertical dashed lines cor­
responding to ​ ΔG = 0 in Fig. 11. 
Concerning the oxidation step, it is also possible to determine the 
maximum non-stoichiometry reached after the re-oxidation reaction 
(δox). The re-oxidation of the reduced material (MxOy−δred) with CO2 
(reaction 3) is the sum of the material oxidation with O2 (reaction 4) and 
the CO2 dissociation (reaction 5). 
1
ΔδMxOy−δred + CO2→1
ΔδMxOy−δox + CO
(3)  
1
ΔδMxOy−δred + 1
2O2→1
ΔδMxOy−δox
(4)  
CO2 →CO + 1
2O2
(5) 
Thus, the Gibbs free enthalpy of re-oxidation reaction is the sum of 
the Gibbs free enthalpy of the two previous reactions, as defined by 
Equation (6), 
ΔG
◦
re−ox = −ΔG
◦
ox(δox) + ΔG
◦
CO2
(6)  
Where ΔG
◦
re−ox, ΔG
◦
ox and ΔG
◦
CO2 are the standard free energy of reactions 
(3), (4), and (5) respectively. The equilibrium constant of the CO2 
dissociation can be expressed at 1 atm as: 
Kdiss = pCO × p1/2
O2
pCO2 × P◦1/2
(7)  
Where Kdiss is the dissociation constant, pCO, pO2, and pCO2 are the partial 
pressure of CO, O2, and CO2, respectively. The CO yields at equilibrium 
can be determined by expressing the oxygen partial pressure in terms of 
the dissociation constant, and values of CO2 and CO partial pressures, as 
shown in Equation (8). 
ΔGO(δred −Δδ) = RTox ln
[KdisspCO2
pCO
]
(8) 
The CO2 and CO partial pressures can be expressed according to the 
following equations: 
pCO2 = nCO2, i −nCO
ng
(9)  
pCO = nCO
ng
(10) 
Where nCO2,i, nCO, ng are the initial amount of CO2, the amount of CO 
and the total amount of gas per mole of reactive material, respectively. 
Combining equations (8)–(10) allows to determine the amount of CO 
produced per mole of material, and corresponding to Δδ. It is assumed 
that the reaction occurs in a closed-system and that spontaneous CO2 
dissociation is not significant at the oxidation temperature. Similar 
reasoning can be applied for an oxidation step using water as oxidant gas 
[73–76]. Using the method previously exposed, the theoretical reduc­
tion extent and fuel production yield for CSM and LSMMg were 
computed (Table 1), representing the boundary values predicted by 
thermodynamics. The operating conditions inputted in the thermody­
namic model were the followings: a reduction step at 1400 ◦C under 
10−5 bar of O2 partial pressure, followed by a re-oxidation step at 
1050 ◦C. The initial amount of oxidant gas was assumed to be in large 
excess at nCO2,i = 1000δred as used in Ref. [74]. These operating condi­
tions correspond to those used in TGA. In addition, a less favorable 
initial CO2 amount for oxidation corresponding to nCO2,i = 10δred was 
also considered for comparison. The theoretical final non-stoichiometry 
extents after the reduction step were calculated at δ = 0.475 and 0.231 
for CSM and LSMMg-P1, respectively. Thus, CSM reached a higher 
reduction extent than LSMMg-P1 at equilibrium (O2 production: 1469 
μmol/g for CSM and 542 μmol/g for LSMMg-P1). This is due to the lower 
enthalpy for CSM in comparison with LSMMg-P1, which permits to 
reach higher final non-stoichiometry. Concerning the oxidation step, 
LSMMg-P1 presents a high re-oxidation yield (72%), whereas it is only 
32% for CSM at 1050 ◦C for nCO2,i = 1000δred. Indeed, CSM exhibits a too 
low enthalpy to allow full re-oxidation. A decrease in the initial amount 
of excess CO2 to 10δred leads to the re-oxidation yield decrease (decrease 
of Δδ in Table 1). The comparison between the theoretical and experi­
mental values obtained with TGA shows a large disparity. This can be 
explained by the limited cycling duration used in TGA, impeding reac­
tion completion, whereas the thermodynamic equilibrium study does 
not consider reaction kinetics. Secondly, as the reduction step is not 
complete, then during the re-oxidation step, the non-stoichiometry 
variation is lower. This analysis confirmed that the very different 
redox behavior of CSM (high reducibility and low oxidation capability 
with CO2) in comparison with LSMMg can be predicted from thermo­
dynamic properties derived from experimental δ(T,pO2) measurements. 
Thus, the thermodynamic study is a relevant approach to highlight 
interesting reactive materials for thermochemical cycles, although it 
must be completed with experimental data and kinetic study of ther­
mochemical cycles. 
3.3. Kinetic study 
The kinetics of redox reactions was investigated to predict the 
amount of fuel produced by a reactive material as a function of the 
cycling time. However, the study of reaction kinetics is complex due to 
the high number of involved parameters. The kinetic rate of a reaction is 
defined by equation (11), 
dα
dt = A exp
(
−Ea
RT
)
f(α)
(11)  
where α is the conversion extent, f a mathematical function representing 
the reaction mechanism, Ea the activation energy, A the pre-exponential 
factor and T the temperature. 
The main reaction models used in solid-state kinetics are presented in 
Table 1 
Theoretical non-stoichiometry extents and O2 and CO production yields derived from thermodynamic equilibrium investigations (Tred = 1400 ◦C, pO2, red = 10−5 bar, 
Tox = 1050 ◦C under CO2 excess).   
Reduction step 
Oxidation step 
Compound 
δred  
O2 produced 
δox 
for nCO2,i =
Δδ 
for nCO2,i =
CO produced 
for nCO2,i =
1000δred  
10δred  
1000δred  
10δred  
1000δred  
10δred    
(μmol/g)     
(μmol/g) 
CSM 
0.475 
1469 
0.321 
0.344 
0.154 
0.041 
923 
246 
LSMMg-P1 
0.231 
542 
0.064 
0.075 
0.167 
0.155 
784 
727  
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 11 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
11
Table S3 [77,78]. The nucleation models describe reactions such as 
crystallization, crystallographic transition or adsorption. The geomet­
rical contraction models assume that the reaction is controlled by the 
progression of the reaction interface toward the center of a reactive 
particle. Diffusion models represent the kinetic mechanism for a reac­
tion controlled by diffusion through the thickness of the product barrier. 
In the order-based models, the reaction rate is proportional to the con­
centration of remaining reactants. In this study, two approaches are 
proposed to investigate the kinetics of the reduction reaction. The first 
one is a simple method requiring experimental data with only one 
heating rate, which provides a first evaluation of the activation energy. 
The second method requires performing the reduction reaction with at 
least three different temperature ramps and permits to obtain the acti­
vation energy as a function of the conversion extent. 
3.3.1. Direct method to determine the activation energy 
The first method permits to calculate the apparent activation energy 
of the reduction reaction by assuming that the reaction mechanism is 
unchanged during the process. Rewriting the general kinetic equation 
(11) gives Equation (12). 
ln
(dα/dt
f(α)
)
= ln(A) −
Ea
RT
(12) 
By plotting ln
(
dα/dt
f(α)
)
as a function of 1/T, the activation energy is 
calculated by linear regression. This method requires knowing the re­
action model function and thus the contracting sphere model (R3) was 
used, assuming that the reaction proceeds from the external surface to 
the core of particles [79]. Indeed, the contracting sphere model (R3) 
offers the best fitting of experimental data (as shown in Fig. S13, 
comparing with A3 and F3 models). The activation energies for all the 
investigated materials were calculated with this method, using TGA data 
(with a heating ramp to 1400 ◦C at 20 ◦C/min in Ar). Fig. 12 represents 
the O2 production yield of all the investigated reactive materials as a 
function of the activation energy of the reduction reaction. The hol­
lowed scatters represent data with high residual standard deviation 
value during the linear regression. Within a given material family, the 
increase of activation energy was clearly correlated to the decrease of O2 
production yield. Indeed, the activation energy represents the energy 
barrier that should be overpassed to perform a reaction. Consequently, 
the activation energy can be used as an indicator to predict the 
non-stoichiometry reached by a reactive material. However, it does not 
give any indication on the oxidation step, impeding to predict the 
amount of fuel produced. The correlation existing between the 
non-stoichiometry extent and the activation energy is further empha­
sized in the next section in the case of LSMMg reduction. 
3.3.2. Iso-conversion method 
The activation energy as a function of the conversion extent can be 
obtained thanks to the iso-conversion method. It assumes that, for a 
fixed conversion extent, the reaction rate only depends on the temper­
ature, as expressed by Equation (13). 
⎡
⎢⎣
∂ln
(
dα
dt
)
∂T−1
⎤
⎥⎦
α
= −Eα
R
(13) 
Numerous iso-conversional computational methods exist, using the 
same principle. In this study, the differential iso-conversional method 
developed by Friedman [80] was used. It is based on Equation (14): 
ln
(dα
dt
)
α, i
= ln[f(α)Aα] −
Eα
RTα,i
(14)  
where i denotes the heating rate, and Tα,i is the temperature at which α is 
reached under the heating rate i. Plotting ln
(
dα
dt
)
α,i 
as a function of 1/
Tα,i allows obtaining the activation energy for each α value, determined 
from the slope of the plot (Fig. 13). The method is model-free, as it does 
not require any reaction model assumption. Complex reaction mecha­
nisms can even be highlighted by a discontinuity of the activation en­
ergy as a function of the conversion extent. Three temperature ramps 
were performed in TGA, as illustrated in Fig. 13a. The rates from TGA 
measurements were assumed not being affected by mass transfer limi­
tations given the low solid mass involved (gas phase oxygen diffusion is 
not limiting) and the sweep gas flow rate was kept unchanged during the 
tests at different heating rates. The conversion extent was defined as the 
ratio of the non-stoichiometry extent to the final non-stoichiometry 
extent. The latter was assumed to be the theoretical final non- 
stoichiometry extent at 1400 ◦C under 10 ppm O2 (calculated in the 
thermodynamic study). The non-stoichiometry evolution as a function 
Fig. 12. Experimental O2 yield as a function of activation energy for the series of investigated reactive materials.  
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 12 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
12
of temperature for 3 ◦C/min and 5 ◦C/min ramps are very similar (but 
different) because the temperature ramps are very close. The non- 
stoichiometry interval in which the activation energy was determined 
corresponds to the non-stoichiometry values reached at the different 
temperatures during heating, since the iso-conversional method 
required using different temperatures for a given α value. 
The activation energy for the reduction of LSMMg-P1 was computed 
with this method (Fig. 14). The evolution of the activation energy versus 
non-stoichiometry extent does not show any discontinuity, revealing a 
single reaction mechanism during the reduction step. The activation 
energy is not constant with the evolution of the reduction extent: it in­
creases from ~300 kJ/mol up to ~500 kJ/mol when non-stoichiometry 
increases. This means that the reduction of LSMMg-P1 becomes more 
kinetically limited as oxygen extraction proceeds, and the reduction 
reaction is thus increasingly hindered. This result confirms the relevance 
of activation energy determination versus non-stoichiometry during the 
reduction reaction. The iso-conversion method provides relevant infor­
mation about the kinetic behavior of reactive materials for thermo­
chemical cycles. Regarding the oxidation step, such methods are not 
applicable because the oxidation step is thermodynamically favored by a 
temperature decrease in the investigated temperature range, thus 
implying a thermodynamic control of the reaction. 
4. Conclusion 
A large range of materials compositions was probed in order to 
identify suitable formulations for thermochemical cycles with poten­
tially high solar-to-fuel conversion efficiency. The materials were 
experimentally screened to unveil the variations in redox reactivity. In 
comparison with ceria, considered as the benchmark material, 
numerous perovskites offer improved thermochemical performance 
related to both reduction extent and fuel production capacity, such as 
(La,A)(B,Mn)O3 (with A = Ca and Sr, and B = Al, Al/Cr, Cr, Ga and Mg), 
(Y,La)SrMnO3, (Pr,Sr)MnO3, and (Sm,Sr)MnO3. LSMMg exhibits prom­
ising performance, combining high reduction extent, high fuel produc­
tion yield, and good thermal stability. In addition, Ca0.5Sr0.5MnO3 
(CSM) was also investigated due to its high reduction capability and 
oxygen mobility, potentially attractive for ceramic membrane applica­
tions (requiring enhanced oxygen ion transport). Kinetic and/or ther­
modynamic properties of LSMMg and CSM were extracted from different 
experiments to provide further insights into their redox activity. 
It has been demonstrated that in A1-xSrxMnO3 perovskites, Sm3+ and 
Pr3+ in A-site permit to increase the reduction extent in comparison with 
Fig. 13. a) Mass variation during TGA of LSMMg for different heating rates under Ar (3 ◦C/min, 5 ◦C/min, and 20 ◦C/min) along with the associated temperature 
profiles. The mass loss during the first reduction step at the different heating rates was used for kinetic analysis (after reduction, the material was re-oxidized at 
1050 ◦C under 50% CO2 in Ar). b) Associated conversion extent as a function of the non-stoichiometry, c) associated non-stoichiometry extent as a function of 
temperature, and d) logarithm of the reaction rate as a function of the inverse temperature for different non-stoichiometry extents at constant heating rates. 
Fig. 14. Activation energy of LSMMg reduction as a function of the non- 
stoichiometry extent. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 13 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
13
La3+ but the re-oxidation yield is not enhanced. The extent of Sr2+
substitution impacts on the perovskite reduction extent as it modifies the 
Mn oxidation state. Among the lanthanum-manganite perovskites, Ca2+
dopant in A-site permits to increase the amount of oxygen released in 
comparison with Sr2+ but not the fuel production yield. For LSM, doping 
with Ga3+, Al3+ and Mg2+ brings about an improvement of the amount 
of oxygen and fuel produced. On the contrary, doping with Cr or Al/Cr 
negatively impacts on LSM thermochemical performance. 
For doped-ceria, the increase of Zr4+ incorporation enhances the 
reduction extent. The optimal Zr content appears to be 15% as it in­
creases both the oxygen and fuel production yields. Conversely, co- 
doping with Al3+/Zr4+ does not improve ceria thermochemical cycles. 
Regarding kinetics, it has been highlighted that the activation energy 
of the reduction step is correlated with the reduction extent of the 
reactive material. Moreover, the activation energy increases with the 
increase of the non-stoichiometry extent during the progression of the 
reduction reaction. However, reduction kinetics does not allow antici­
pating the re-oxidation rate/yield, which is also a key factor for mate­
rials selection. In addition, the determination of thermodynamic 
properties permits to predict the theoretical reduction and re-oxidation 
extent, but experimental values can be lower than those predicted at 
thermodynamic equilibrium due to kinetic limitations. Thus, it is 
essential to combine both kinetic and thermodynamic studies, in order 
to provide the most complete overview of the redox behavior of the 
selected reactive materials. 
CRediT authorship contribution statement 
Anita Haeussler: Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, 
Visualization, Validation, Writing – original draft. Anne Julbe: Writing 
– review & editing, Supervision. St´ephane Abanades: Conceptualiza­
tion, Methodology, Investigation, Data curation, Formal analysis, Vali­
dation, Writing – review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, 
Funding acquisition. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was funded by the French National Agency for Research 
(ANR, SUNFUEL project, contract N◦ANR-16-CE06-0010). The authors 
thank J. Jouannaux for P2-powders synthesis. 
Appendix A. Supplementary data 
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matchemphys.2021.125358. 
References 
[1] C.L. Muhich, B.D. Ehrhart, I. Al-Shankiti, B.J. Ward, C.B. Musgrave, A.W. Weimer, 
A review and perspective of efficient hydrogen generation via solar thermal water 
splitting, WIREs Energy Environ 5 (2015) 261–287, https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
wene.174. 
[2] S. Abanades, P. Charvin, G. Flamant, P. Neveu, Screening of water-splitting 
thermochemical cycles potentially attractive for hydrogen production by 
concentrated solar energy, Energy 31 (2006) 2805–2822, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.energy.2005.11.002. 
[3] G. Centi, S. Perathoner, Opportunities and prospects in the chemical recycling of 
carbon dioxide to fuels, Catal. Today 148 (2009) 191–205, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cattod.2009.07.075. 
[4] S. Abanades, Thermogravimetry analysis of CO2 and H2O reduction from solar 
nanosized Zn powder for thermochemical fuel production, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res. 51 
(2012) 741–750, https://doi.org/10.1021/ie202518k. 
[5] S. Abanades, A. Legal, A. Cordier, G. Peraudeau, G. Flamant, A. Julbe, Investigation 
of reactive cerium-based oxides for H2 production by thermochemical two-step 
water-splitting, J. Mater. Sci. 45 (2010) 4163–4173, https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s10853-010-4506-4. 
[6] F. Call, M. Roeb, M. Schmücker, C. Sattler, R. Pitz-Paal, Ceria doped with 
Zirconium and lanthanide oxides to enhance solar thermochemical production of 
fuels, J. Phys. Chem. C 119 (2015) 6929–6938, https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
jp508959y. 
[7] P. Charvin, S. Abanades, E. Beche, F. Lemont, G. Flamant, Hydrogen production 
from mixed cerium oxides via three-step water-splitting cycles, Solid State Ionics 
180 (2009) 1003–1010, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2009.03.015. 
[8] S. Abanades, I. Villafan-Vidales, CO2 valorisation based on Fe3O4/FeO 
thermochemical redox reactions using concentrated solar energy, Int. J. Energy 
Res. 37 (2013) 598–608, https://doi.org/10.1002/er.1953. 
[9] T. Kodama, Y. Kondoh, R. Yamamoto, H. Andou, N. Satou, Thermochemical 
hydrogen production by a redox system of ZrO2-supported Co(II)-ferrite, Sol. 
Energy 78 (2005) 623–631, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2004.04.008. 
[10] J.E. Miller, M.D. Allendorf, R.B. Diver, L.R. Evans, N.P. Siegel, J.N. Stuecker, Metal 
oxide composites and structures for ultra-high temperature solar thermochemical 
cycles, J. Mater. Sci. 43 (2008) 4714–4728, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-007- 
2354-7. 
[11] P.G. Loutzenhiser, M.E. G´alvez, I. Hischier, A. Stamatiou, A. Frei, A. Steinfeld, CO2 
splitting via two-step solar thermochemical cycles with Zn/ZnO and FeO/Fe 3O4 
redox reactions II: kinetic analysis, Energy Fuel. 23 (2009) 2832–2839, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ef801142b. 
[12] C. Agrafiotis, A. Zygogianni, C. Pagkoura, M. Kostoglou, A.G. Konstandopoulos, 
Hydrogen production via solar-aided water splitting thermochemical cycles with 
nickel ferrite: experiments and modeling, AlChE J 59 (2013) 1213–1225, https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/aic.13882. 
[13] C. Milone, Y. Kato, E. Mastronardo, Thermal energy storage with chemical 
reactions, in: A. Frazzica, L.F. Cabeza (Eds.), Recent Advancements in Materials 
and Systems for Thermal Energy Storage, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
2019, pp. 15–32, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96640-3_3. 
[14] B. Bulfin, J. Vieten, C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, C. Sattler, Applications and limitations 
of two step metal oxide thermochemical redox cycles; a review, J. Mater. Chem. A. 
5 (2017) 18951–18966, https://doi.org/10.1039/C7TA05025A. 
[15] A. Haeussler, S. Abanades, J. Jouannaux, A. Julbe, Non-stoichiometric redox active 
perovskite materials for solar thermochemical fuel production: a review, Catalysts 
8 (2018) 611–631, https://doi.org/10.3390/catal8120611. 
[16] Abanades, Metal oxides applied to thermochemical water-splitting for hydrogen 
production using concentrated solar energy, ChemEngineering 3 (2019) 63, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/chemengineering3030063. 
[17] R.J. Carrillo, J.R. Scheffe, Advances and trends in redox materials for solar 
thermochemical fuel production, Sol. Energy 156 (2017) 3–20, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solener.2017.05.032. 
[18] C.-K. Yang, Y. Yamazaki, A. Aydin, S.M. Haile, Thermodynamic and kinetic 
assessments of strontium-doped lanthanum manganite perovskites for two-step 
thermochemical water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A. 2 (2014) 13612–13623, 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TA02694B. 
[19] M.E. G´alvez, R. Jacot, J. Scheffe, T. Cooper, G. Patzke, A. Steinfeld, Physico- 
chemical changes in Ca, Sr and Al-doped La–Mn–O perovskites upon 
thermochemical splitting of CO2 via redox cycling, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17 
(2015) 6629–6634, https://doi.org/10.1039/C4CP05898D. 
[20] A. Demont, S. Abanades, Solar thermochemical conversion of CO2 into fuel via 
two-step redox cycling of non-stoichiometric Mn-containing perovskite oxides, 
J. Mater. Chem. A. 3 (2015) 3536–3546, https://doi.org/10.1039/C4TA06655C. 
[21] T. Cooper, J.R. Scheffe, M.E. Galvez, R. Jacot, G. Patzke, A. Steinfeld, Lanthanum 
manganite perovskites with Ca/Sr A-site and Al B-site doping as effective oxygen 
exchange materials for solar thermochemical fuel production, Energy Technol. 3 
(2015) 1130–1142, https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201500226. 
[22] L. Wang, M. Al-Mamun, Y.L. Zhong, L. Jiang, P. Liu, Y. Wang, H.G. Yang, H. Zhao, 
Ca2+ and Ga3+ doped LaMnO3 perovskite as a highly efficient and stable catalyst 
for two-step thermochemical water splitting, Sustainable Energy Fuels 1 (2017) 
1013–1017, https://doi.org/10.1039/C6SE00097E. 
[23] M.M. Nair, S. Abanades, Experimental screening of perovskite oxides as efficient 
redox materials for solar thermochemical CO2 conversion, Sustainable Energy 
Fuels 2 (2018) 843–854, https://doi.org/10.1039/C7SE00516D. 
[24] J. Jouannaux, A. Haeussler, M. Drobek, A. Ayral, S. Abanades, A. Julbe, Lanthanum 
manganite perovskite ceramic powders for CO2 splitting: influence of Pechini 
synthesis parameters on sinterability and reactivity, Ceram. Int. 45 (2019) 
15636–15648, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2019.05.075. 
[25] A.H. McDaniel, E.C. Miller, D. Arifin, A. Ambrosini, E.N. Coker, R. O’Hayre, W. 
C. Chueh, J. Tong, Sr- and Mn-doped LaAlO3−δ for solar thermochemical H2 and 
CO production, Energ, Environ. Sci. 6 (2013) 2424–2428, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/c3ee41372a. 
[26] S. Dey, B.S. Naidu, C.N.R. Rao, Beneficial effects of substituting trivalent ions in the 
B-site of La0.5Sr0.5Mn1−xAxO3 (A = Al, Ga, Sc) on the thermochemical generation of 
CO and H2 from CO2 and H2O, Dalton Trans. 45 (2016) 2430–2435, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C5DT04822B. 
[27] M.M. Nair, S. Abanades, Insights into the redox performance of non-stoichiometric 
lanthanum manganite perovskites for solar thermochemical CO2 splitting, 
ChemistrySelect 1 (2016) 4449–4457, https://doi.org/10.1002/slct.201601171. 
[28] A. Haeussler, S. Abanades, J. Jouannaux, A. Julbe, Demonstration of a ceria 
membrane solar reactor promoted by dual perovskite coatings for continuous and 
isothermal redox splitting of CO2 and H2O, J. Membr. Sci. 634 (2021) 119387., 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.memsci.2021.119387. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 14 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
14
[29] A. Haeussler, S. Abanades, A. Julbe, J. Jouannaux, B. Cartoixa, Two-step CO2 and 
H2O splitting using perovskite-coated ceria foam for enhanced green fuel 
production in a porous volumetric solar reactor, Journal of CO2 Utilization 41 
(2020) 101257, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcou.2020.101257. 
[30] T.O.L. Sunde, T. Grande, M.-A. Einarsrud, Modified Pechini synthesis of oxide 
powders and thin films, in: Handbook of Sol-Gel Science and Technology, Springer, 
2016. 
[31] M.P. Pechini, Method of Preparing Lead and Alkaline Earth Titanates and Niobates 
and Coating Method Using the Same to Form a Capacitor, 1967. US3330697A, http 
s://patents.google.com/patent/US3330697A/en. (Accessed 21 April 2020). 
[32] G.B.J. de Boer, C. de Weerd, D. Thoenes, H.W.J. Goossens, Laser diffraction 
spectrometry: fraunhofer diffraction versus Mie scattering, Part. Part. Syst. Char. 4 
(1987) 14–19, https://doi.org/10.1002/ppsc.19870040104. 
[33] S.P. Jiang, Development of lanthanum strontium manganite perovskite cathode 
materials of solid oxide fuel cells: a review, J. Mater. Sci. 43 (2008) 6799–6833, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10853-008-2966-6. 
[34] Y. Xue, H. Miao, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Li, Z. Liu, (La1−xSrx)0.98MnO3 perovskite with 
A-site deficiencies toward oxygen reduction reaction in aluminum-air batteries, 
J. Power Sources 342 (2017) 192–201, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jpowsour.2016.12.065. 
[35] H.-C. Cho, S. Kuramoto, S. Takase, J.-H. Song, Y. Shimizu, Sensing properties of 
impedancemetric solid-electrolyte NOx sensor using perovskite-type lanthanum 
manganite-based receptor, Sensor. Mater. 24 (2012) 31, https://doi.org/ 
10.18494/SAM.2012.763. 
[36] M.R. Mullen, J.V. Spirig, J. Hoy, J.L. Routbort, D. Singh, P.K. Dutta, Development 
of nanosized lanthanum strontium aluminum manganite as electrodes for 
potentiometric oxygen sensor, Sensor. Actuator. B Chem. 203 (2014) 670–676, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2014.07.027. 
[37] S. Ponce, M.A. Pe˜na, J.L.G. Fierro, Surface properties and catalytic performance in 
methane combustion of Sr-substituted lanthanum manganites, Appl. Catal. B 
Environ. 24 (2000) 193–205, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-3373(99)00111-3. 
[38] G.J. la O’, Y. Shao-Horn, Thickness dependence of oxygen reduction reaction 
kinetics on strontium-substituted lanthanum manganese perovskite thin-film 
microelectrodes, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 12 (2009) B82, https://doi.org/ 
10.1149/1.3095681. 
[39] J.R. Scheffe, D. Weibel, A. Steinfeld, Lanthanum–Strontium–Manganese 
perovskites as redox materials for solar thermochemical splitting of H2O and CO2, 
Energy Fuel. 27 (2013) 4250–4257, https://doi.org/10.1021/ef301923h. 
[40] A.L.A. da Silva, L. da Conceiç˜ao, A.M. Rocco, M.M.V.M. Souza, Synthesis of Sr- 
doped LaMnO3 and LaCrO3 powders by combustion method: structural 
characterization and thermodynamic evaluation, Cerˆamica 58 (2012) 521–528, 
https://doi.org/10.1590/S0366-69132012000400018. 
[41] J.E. Miller, A. Ambrosini, E.N. Coker, M.D. Allendorf, A.H. McDaniel, Advancing 
oxide materials for thermochemical production of solar fuels, Energy Procedia 49 
(2014) 2019–2026, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2014.03.214. 
[42] C. Agrafiotis, M. Roeb, C. Sattler, A review on solar thermal syngas production via 
redox pair-based water/carbon dioxide splitting thermochemical cycles, Renew. 
Sustain. Energy Rev. 42 (2015) 254–285, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2014.09.039. 
[43] A. Demont, S. Abanades, E. Beche, Investigation of perovskite structures as oxygen- 
exchange redox materials for hydrogen production from thermochemical two-step 
water-splitting cycles, J. Phys. Chem. C 118 (2014) 12682–12692, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp5034849. 
[44] A.H. Bork, E. Povoden-Karadeniz, J.L.M. Rupp, Modeling thermochemical solar-to- 
fuel conversion: CALPHAD for thermodynamic assessment studies of perovskites, 
exemplified for (La,Sr)MnO3, Adv. Energy Mater. 7 (2017) 1601086, https://doi. 
org/10.1002/aenm.201601086. 
[45] J.H. Kuo, H.U. Anderson, D.M. Sparlin, Oxidation-reduction behavior of undoped 
and Sr-doped LaMnO3 nonstoichiometry and defect structure, J. Solid State Chem. 
83 (1989) 52–60, https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-4596(89)90053-4. 
[46] J. Mizusaki, Oxygen nonstoichiometry and defect equilibrium in the perovskite- 
type oxides La1−xSrxMnO3+d, Solid State Ionics 129 (2000) 163–177, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0167-2738(99)00323-9. 
[47] S. Dey, C.N.R. Rao, Splitting of CO2 by manganite perovskites to generate CO by 
solar isothermal redox cycling, ACS Energy Lett 1 (2016) 237–243, https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsenergylett.6b00122. 
[48] A. Haeussler, S. Abanades, J. Jouannaux, M. Drobek, A. Ayral, A. Julbe, Recent 
progress on ceria doping and shaping strategies for solar thermochemical water 
and CO2 splitting cycles, AIMS Materials Science 6 (2019) 657–684, https://doi. 
org/10.3934/matersci.2019.5.657. 
[49] O. Toulemonde, N. N’Guyen, F. Studer, A. Traverse, Spin state transition in LaCoO3 
with temperature or strontium doping as seen by XAS, J. Solid State Chem. 158 
(2001) 208–217, https://doi.org/10.1006/jssc.2001.9094. 
[50] O. Haas, R.P.W.J. Struis, J.M. McBreen, Synchrotron X-ray absorption of LaCoO3 
perovskite, J. Solid State Chem. 177 (2004) 1000–1010, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jssc.2003.10.004. 
[51] C. Abughayada, Air Separation and Oxygen Storage Properties of Hexagonal Rare- 
Earth Manganites, Doctoral dissertation, Northern Illinois University, 2015. 
https://commons.lib.niu.edu/handle/10843/18551. 
[52] (n.d Shannon Radii. http://abulafia.mt.ic.ac.uk/shannon/ptable.php. (Accessed 4 
January 2018). 
[53] D.R. Barcellos, M.D. Sanders, J. Tong, A.H. McDaniel, R.P. O’Hayre, 
BaCe0.25Mn0.75O3−δ —a promising perovskite-type oxide for solar thermochemical 
hydrogen production, Energ, Environ. Sci. 11 (2018) 3256–3265, https://doi.org/ 
10.1039/C8EE01989D. 
[54] P. Furler, J.R. Scheffe, A. Steinfeld, Syngas production by simultaneous splitting of 
H2O and CO2 via ceria redox reactions in a high-temperature solar reactor, Energy 
Environ. Sci. 5 (2012) 6098–6103, https://doi.org/10.1039/C1EE02620H. 
[55] B. Bulfin, A.J. Lowe, K.A. Keogh, B.E. Murphy, O. Lübben, S.A. Krasnikov, I. 
V. Shvets, Analytical model of CeO2 oxidation and reduction, J. Phys. Chem. C 117 
(2013) 24129–24137, https://doi.org/10.1021/jp406578z. 
[56] W.C. Chueh, C. Falter, M. Abbott, D. Scipio, P. Furler, S.M. Haile, A. Steinfeld, 
High-flux solar-driven thermochemical dissociation of CO2 and H2O using 
nonstoichiometric ceria, Science 330 (2010) 1797–1801, https://doi.org/10.1126/ 
science.1197834. 
[57] J.R. Scheffe, A. Steinfeld, Oxygen exchange materials for solar thermochemical 
splitting of H2O and CO2: a review, Mater. Today 17 (2014) 341–348, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.mattod.2014.04.025. 
[58] H. Kong, X. Kong, H. Wang, J. Wang, A strategy for optimizing efficiencies of solar 
thermochemical fuel production based on nonstoichiometric oxides, Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy (2019), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2019.05.197. 
[59] G. Takalkar, R.R. Bhosale, S. Rashid, F. AlMomani, R.A. Shakoor, A. Al Ashraf, 
Application of Li-, Mg-, Ba-, Sr-, Ca-, and Sn-doped ceria for solar-driven 
thermochemical conversion of carbon dioxide, J. Mater. Sci. (2020), https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s10853-020-04875-1. 
[60] A. Le Gal, S. Abanades, Catalytic investigation of ceria-zirconia solid solutions for 
solar hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 36 (2011) 4739–4748, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2011.01.078. 
[61] G. Vlaic, P. Fornasiero, S. Geremia, J. Kaˇspar, M. Graziani, Relationship between 
the zirconia-promoted reduction in the Rh-loaded Ce0.5Zr0.5O2 mixed oxide and the 
Zr–O local structure, J. Catal. 168 (1997) 386–392, https://doi.org/10.1006/ 
jcat.1997.1644. 
[62] A. Le Gal, S. Abanades, G. Flamant, CO2 and H2O splitting for thermochemical 
production of solar fuels using nonstoichiometric ceria and ceria/zirconia solid 
solutions, Energy Fuel. 25 (2011) 4836–4845, https://doi.org/10.1021/ef200972r. 
[63] E.I. Goldyreva, I.A. Leonidov, M.V. Patrakeev, A.V. Chukin, I.I. Leonidov, V. 
L. Kozhevnikov, Oxygen nonstoichiometry and defect equilibrium in electron 
doped Ca0.6−уSr0.4LaуMnO3−δ, J. Alloys Compd. 638 (2015) 44–49, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2015.03.048. 
[64] K.J. Albrecht, G.S. Jackson, R.J. Braun, Thermodynamically consistent modeling of 
redox-stable perovskite oxides for thermochemical energy conversion and storage, 
Appl. Energy 165 (2016) 285–296, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2015.11.098. 
[65] Y. Hao, C.-K. Yang, S.M. Haile, Ceria–zirconia solid solutions (Ce1–xZrxO2−δ, x ≤
0.2) for solar thermochemical water splitting: a thermodynamic study, Chem. 
Mater. 26 (2014) 6073–6082, https://doi.org/10.1021/cm503131p. 
[66] J. Vieten, B. Bulfin, P. Huck, M. Horton, D. Guban, L. Zhu, Y. Lu, K.A. Persson, 
M. Roeb, C. Sattler, Materials design of perovskite solid solutions for 
thermochemical applications, Energy Environ. Sci. 12 (2019) 1369–1384, https:// 
doi.org/10.1039/C9EE00085B. 
[67] R.J. Panlener, R.N. Blumenthal, J.E. Garnier, A thermodynamic study of 
nonstoichiometric cerium dioxide, J. Phys. Chem. Solid. 36 (1975) 1213–1222, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-3697(75)90192-4. 
[68] X. Qian, J. He, E. Mastronardo, B. Baldassarri, C. Wolverton, S.M. Haile, Favorable 
redox thermodynamics of SrTi0.5Mn0.5O3−δ in solar thermochemical water 
splitting, Chem. Mater. 32 (2020) 9335–9346, https://doi.org/10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.0c03278. 
[69] E. Mastronardo, X. Qian, J.M. Coronado, S.M. Haile, Impact of La doping on the 
thermochemical heat storage properties of CaMnO3-δ, Journal of Energy Storage 40 
(2021) 102793, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2021.102793. 
[70] L. Imponenti, K.J. Albrecht, J.W. Wands, M.D. Sanders, G.S. Jackson, 
Thermochemical energy storage in strontium-doped calcium manganites for 
concentrating solar power applications, Sol. Energy 151 (2017) 1–13, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.05.010. 
[71] S.M. Babiniec, E.N. Coker, J.E. Miller, A. Ambrosini, Doped calcium manganites for 
advanced high-temperature thermochemical energy storage, Int. J. Energy Res. 40 
(2016) 280–284, https://doi.org/10.1002/er.3467. 
[72] J. Vieten, B. Bulfin, M. Senholdt, M. Roeb, C. Sattler, M. Schmücker, Redox 
thermodynamics and phase composition in the system SrFeO3−δ — SrMnO3−δ, 
Solid State Ionics 308 (2017) 149–155, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ssi.2017.06.014. 
[73] J.R. Scheffe, A. Steinfeld, Thermodynamic analysis of cerium-based oxides for solar 
thermochemical fuel production, energ, Fuel 26 (2012), https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
ef201875v, 1928–1936. 
[74] M. Takacs, M. Hoes, M. Caduff, T. Cooper, J.R. Scheffe, A. Steinfeld, Oxygen 
nonstoichiometry, defect equilibria, and thermodynamic characterization of 
LaMnO3 perovskites with Ca/Sr A-site and Al B-site doping, Acta Mater. 103 (2016) 
700–710, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2015.10.026. 
[75] M. Takacs, J.R. Scheffe, A. Steinfeld, Oxygen nonstoichiometry and 
thermodynamic characterization of Zr doped ceria in the 1573–1773 K 
temperature range, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 17 (2015) 7813–7822, https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C4CP04916K. 
[76] W.C. Chueh, S.M. Haile, A thermochemical study of ceria: exploiting an old 
material for new modes of energy conversion and CO2 mitigation, Phil. Trans. R. 
Soc. A. 368 (2010) 3269–3294, https://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2010.0114. 
[77] S. Vyazovkin, A.K. Burnham, J.M. Criado, L.A. P´erez-Maqueda, C. Popescu, 
N. Sbirrazzuoli, ICTAC Kinetics Committee recommendations for performing 
kinetic computations on thermal analysis data, Thermochim. Acta 520 (2011) 
1–19, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tca.2011.03.034. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              


===== Page 15 =====

Materials Chemistry and Physics 276 (2022) 125358
15
[78] A. Khawam, D.R. Flanagan, Solid-state kinetic models: basics and mathematical 
fundamentals, J. Phys. Chem. B 110 (2006) 17315–17328, https://doi.org/ 
10.1021/jp062746a. 
[79] O. Levenspiel, Chemical Reaction Engineering, vol. 3, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 1999. 
[80] H.L. Friedman, Kinetics of thermal degradation of char-forming plastics from 
thermogravimetry. Application to a phenolic plastic, J. Polym. Sci., Part C: Polym. 
Symp. 6 (1964) 183–195, https://doi.org/10.1002/polc.5070060121. 
A. Haeussler et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
