

===== Page 1 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
Available online 14 July 2023
0038-092X/© 2023 International Solar Energy Society. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Long-term replenishment strategy of SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles for 
high-temperature thermochemical energy storage 
Di Gan a,b,1, Hongbin Sheng a,b,1, PeiWang Zhu a,b,c, Haoran Xu a,b,c, Gang Xiao a,b,c,* 
a Key Laboratory of Clean Energy and Carbon Neutrality of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China 
b State Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, 310027, China 
c Jiaxing Research Institute, Zhejiang University, 1300 Dongshengxilu Road, Jiaxing, 314031, China   
A R T I C L E  I N F O   
Keywords: 
Replenishment model 
Thermochemical energy storage 
Long-term cycling 
Strengthened particle 
CSP plants 
A B S T R A C T   
Thermal chemical energy storage (TCES) is a promising technology for large-scale energy storage, but long-term 
use of TCES materials can lead to attrition and reaction performance deterioration, compromising heat storage 
capacity and system continuity. To tackle this challenge, it is imperative to develop effective replenishment 
strategies and investigate the evolution of TCES materials. In this study, SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles exhibited 
superior performance, with only 1.87% mass loss ratio after 4.32 × 105 rotations attrition testing and a reaction 
conversion of 91.7% even after 800 reaction cycles. However, assessing material suitability for TCES systems 
necessitates analyzing both attrition resistance and reaction performance. A replenishment strategy was pro­
posed, based on the attrition conversion factor and analysis of dissipated energy of particles in concentrated solar 
power (CSP) plants. Compared to undoped Mn-Fe particles, the annual replenishment ratio was reduced by one 
order of magnitude for SiC-doped particles, to only 1.26% (0.5 wt% SiC) and 0.994% (1 wt% SiC). The 
replenishment strategy and strengthened particles result in curtailed particle fines and particle flow interruption, 
and enhanced economics. Continuous replenishment strategy can undoubtedly cater to the requisite heat storage 
capacity demands for protracted system operation and extend system stability, promoting the advancement of 
TCES technology.   
1. Introduction 
Renewable energy sources are plagued by intermittency and vari­
ability issues, underlining the critical importance of large-scale energy 
storage. Thermochemical energy storage (TCES) offers advantages such 
as high energy storage density and long-term heat retention, making it a 
promising candidate for effective large-scale energy storage [35,42]. 
iron-doped manganese oxides have been widely studied for thermal 
energy storage due to their fast reaction kinetics, low cost, non-toxicity, 
high reaction temperature range, high reaction conversion ratio and 
reoxidation ratio, high heat storage density (797.3 kJ/kg, including 
595.74 kJ/kg sensible heat and 201.56 kJ/kg thermochemical heat) 
[49] compared to molten salt(304 kJ/kg) [14] and the use of air as a 
medium [3,13,46,48,49]. These advantages enable high-density thermal 
storage, which can further improve economic performance. However, 
continuous operation of the system places high demands on the long- 
term characteristics of the thermal storage material and long-term 
operation strategy [16,21,27,42]. 
In CSP plants, particle fines accumulation can greatly hinder particle 
flow and cause reduced flowability, compromising heat storage capacity 
and system continuity. Recent literature highlighted the impact of me­
chanical strength in Mn-Fe particles on continuous operation [22,47]. 
Strengthening the toughness of these particles is crucial [28]. To address 
this issue, ongoing research has explored various approaches to enhance 
the mechanical strength. Agrafiotis et al. coated porous foam with 
(Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3, demonstrating reproducible performance while main­
taining structural integrity after 33 cycles [2]. Azimi et al. tested several 
supports to enhance the attrition resistance of (Mn0.75Fe0.25)2O3 parti­
cles [6,7]. Presiner et al. investigated the chemical stability and me­
chanical strength of (Mn0.7Fe0.3)2O3 particles doped with TiO2, ZrO2, or 
CeO2 and found that ZrO2 and CeO2 increased attrition resistance [39]. 
Bielsa et al. enhanced the chemical and mechanical stability of Si-doped 
manganese oxide particles through granulation technique optimization, 
* Corresponding author at: Key Laboratory of Clean Energy and Carbon Neutrality of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang University, 38 Zheda Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 
310027, China. 
E-mail address: xiaogangtianmen@zju.edu.cn (G. Xiao).   
1 The two authors have the same contribution to this study. 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Solar Energy 
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/solener 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2023.111842 
Received 25 April 2023; Received in revised form 29 June 2023; Accepted 2 July 2023   


===== Page 2 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
2
achieving complete re-oxidation over 100 cycles and 30% increase in 
mechanical strength [10]. Due to excellent resistance to high tempera­
tures, high strength, thermal stability, and low cost (compared to CeO2 
and ZrO2 which has been proved as potential additives to increase in 
resistance towards attrition) [39] of SiC, some researchers use it as po­
tential materials to increase TCES materials strength at high- 
temperature. Peterson et al. developed strengthened Cu-based oxygen 
carriers by incorporating β-SiC and calcining them to form a protective 
SiO2 layer, with the porous and high-surface-area SiC structure showing 
potential for gas–solid reactions and particle strengthening [36]. Guo 
et al. improved heat transfer efficiency and mechanical stability by 
adapting ceramic honeycomb SiC-DPF as a side shell for CaCO3 pellets, 
which was able to support a load of 1.3 MPa after 22 cycles [20]. Li et al. 
investigated the synergistic effects of Mn and SiC doping on the me­
chanical, optical, and thermal properties of CaO-based materials, and 
found that SiC positively impacted the crushing strength of the pellets, 
increasing it from 6.2 to 7.0 N after 10 cycles [30]. SiC has emerged as a 
promising candidate for particle mechanical strength improvement. 
Besides, numerous investigations have been conducted to investigate 
cycling performance of manganese oxides. Wang et al. discovered that 
manganese-iron oxides exhibited well-preserved reduction performance 
after 500 cycles [40]. Carrio et al. conducted a longevity test on iron- 
doped manganese oxides over 75 redox cycles, demonstrating their 
potential for long-term cycling without deactivation [15]. Wokon et al. 
assessed the performance of technical grade raw material made 
manganese-iron binary oxide over 100 cycles in air, proving good 
cycling performance despite exhibiting a “swelling effect” during long- 
term cycles [46]. Wang et al. found that doping TiO2 to manganese 
oxide resulted in better reaction performance but some agglomeration 
occurred [44], and Schrader et al. observed agglomeration formations of 
CAM28 (CaAl0.2Mn0.8O3-δ) in granular flow channels [41]. Moya et al. 
successfully obtained coral-like morphology by doping manganese oxide 
with molybdenum, which presented excellent reaction performance 
after 45 cycles [34]. Bielsa et al. evaluated the synergistic effect of Si 
element and sol–gel method on redox performance of manganese oxides, 
providing complete reversibility after 40 cycles but some particle size 
increase [11]. Yilmaz et al. found cyclic stability and reaction perfor­
mance of Mn-Si oxides improved with increasing silica content [52]. 
Hamidi et al. emphasized the importance of TCES material durability 
and cycling stability for practical application at scale when conducting 
reduction experiments of Fe67 (particles composed of iron–manganese 
oxide with a molar ratio of Fe/Mn 2:1) particles in a fixed-bed reactor 
using an infrared irradiation (IR) furnace [21]. Abad et al. found 1.4 wt 
% TiO2-doped manganese oxides had the best oxygen uncoupling 
capability among all other TiO2-doped sample, while iron oxides 
decreased mechanical strength [1]. 
However, establishing an accurate relationship between particle 
strength and operational performance cannot rely solely on mechanical 
tests. This is particularly critical for Mn-Fe particles. In CSP plants, the 
filling of small particles into void spaces can lead to close packing, 
resulting in reduced flowability [45]. Elevated temperatures increase 
static sliding friction, exacerbating flowability degradation [8,51]. 
Techno-economic analyses reveal that thermochemical particles ac­
count for 4%-12% of the total system cost of CSP plants [9,12,19,23]. 
Considering the additional costs resulting from severe attrition [31], it is 
urgent to investigate the reaction performance and attrition character­
istics of Mn-Fe particles during long-term operation, establish correla­
tions between particle attenuation process and systems operation, and 
provide vital data support for the design and regulation of CSP plants. 
To address the aforementioned requirements, this study investigates 
the long-term performance evolution of SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles and 
their effects on CSP plants. The investigation focuses on long-term 
replenishment strategy based on Mn-Fe particles’ attrition characteris­
tics and reaction cycling performance, to gain insight into the effect of 
Nomenclature 
Latin letters 
E 
dissipated energy 
H 
heat storage capacity 
H0 
initial heat storage capacity 
Hf 
hardness 
Hremain 
remaining heat storage capacity of particles 
kf 
probability of the micro protrusions on the surface will be 
sheared off 
kH 
heat storage replenishment ratio 
kimp 
proportionality factor of impact attrition 
km 
replenishment mass ratio 
krep,annu 
average annual replenishment rates 
ksum m 
total replenishment mass ratio 
Kc 
attrition volume per unit of dissipated energy 
Kfric 
frictional attrition volume loss coefficient 
Kft 
fracture toughness 
Kimp 
impacted attrition volume loss coefficient 
l 
linear particle size 
L 
the relative sliding distance 
m 
mass 
m0 
initial particle mass of CSP plants 
nt 
number of times of replenishment 
nyear 
operation year 
N 
the normal force 
R 
attrition conversion factor 
V 
attrition volume loss 
Greek letters 
αh 
remaining heat storage capacity ratio 
αm 
remaining mass ratio 
θN 
angle between force and normal direction 
ρ 
mass density 
υimp 
normal velocity 
Abbreviations 
AR 
attrition rate 
CAM28 
CaAl0.2Mn0.8O3-δ 
CSP 
concentrated solar power 
DSC 
differential scanning calorimetry 
Fe67 
particles composed of iron–manganese oxide with a molar 
ratio of Fe/Mn 2:1 
IR 
infrared irradiation 
MR 
mass ratio 
PRR 
particle replenishment rate 
sCO2 
supercritical carbon dioxide 
TRMR 
total replenishment mass ratio 
TCES 
thermal chemical energy storage 
TGA 
thermal gravimetric analyzer 
Subscripts 
cyl 
cylindrical drum test apparatus 
fric 
frictional attrition 
imp 
impacted attrition 
SH 
sensible heat 
N 
normal 
oxd 
oxidation reaction 
TCE 
thermochemical heat  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 3 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
3
particles’ long-term evolution process on operation of CSP plant. Based 
on the models of attrition conversion factor, this study proposes a 
replenishment strategy for long-term system operation, providing 
valuable guidance for CSP plant optimizing. Optimizing particle 
replenishment rates [19] underscores the contribution of particle 
strengthening towards inventory cost reduction and improved system 
economics. Furthermore, identifying long-term attrition characteristics 
and reaction performance evolution provides crucial data support for 
system regulation, enabling continuous and stable CSP plant operation 
over the long term while promoting the development of thermochemical 
energy storage technology (see Fig. 1). 
2. Material preparation and method 
2.1. Preparation of SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles 
In selecting strengthening materials for particle systems, it is crucial 
to ensure that they possess high-temperature stability, good thermo­
chemical compatibility, and cost-effectiveness [32]. SiC has emerged as 
a promising candidate due to its excellent resistance to high tempera­
tures, high strength, thermal stability and low cost. Therefore, SiC was 
selected as the doping material in this study. 
SiC-doped (Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3 particles were synthesized using a high- 
temperature solid-state reaction method [43] that involved several 
steps, including powder mixing, extrusion, spheronization, drying, and 
high-temperature treatment of Mn3O4 (>97 wt%, Macklin), Fe2O3 (>99 
wt%, Macklin), and SiC (>99 wt%, Macklin) powders (see Fig. 2). The 
molar ratios of Mn and Fe were set at 4:1 to prepare mixed oxides with 8 
wt% microcrystalline cellulose (>97 wt%, Yuanye). The addition of 
microcrystalline cellulose is not only beneficial for the subsequent 
smooth extrusion of the mixed powder, but also helps to form pores 
inside the particles, facilitating the reaction [30]. The mixed powder 
was put into a drum-type ball mill and mixed for 4 h at a rotation speed 
of 300 r/min to ensure thorough mixing. 18 wt% of deionized water was 
added to the mixed powder to fully wet it for subsequent extrusion. 
Since the metal oxides mixed powder was relatively hard, a planetary 
extruder with a large torque was used for the extrusion step, and the 
pore size of the extrusion screen was set at 0.7 mm. The mixed powder 
was continuously extruded at 10 r/min to obtain a columnar object 
material. The extruded columnar object material was put into a cen­
trifugal spheronizer with a rotation speed of 300 r/min for 5 min. The 
resulting wet particles was soft and prone to sticking together, but most 
of the moisture could be removed by drying at 150 ◦C for 1 h to reduce 
adhesion and facilitate high-temperature treatment to obtain dispersed 
particles. The dried particles were subject to high-temperature 
treatment, where they were heated from room temperature to 1000 ◦C 
and kept at that temperature for 8 h to ensure full synthesizing. After­
wards, they were cooled naturally down to room temperature. 
In this study, undoped (Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3 particles and three types of 
SiC-doped with doping ratios of 0.5 wt%, 1 wt%, and 5 wt% were syn­
thesized. Properties of all four particle types were characterized through 
long-term tests, providing essential insights into their performance and 
enabling a comprehensive comparison of the effects of different doping 
ratio. 
2.2. Long-term attrition characteristic test 
To measure particle attrition characteristics during long-term oper­
ation, a cylindrical drum attrition characteristic test apparatus was 
designed (ASTM D4058-96). The device emulates the particle attrition 
process as large numbers of particles continuously impact the inner 
walls while being impelled by an internal baffle. The cylinders are made 
of wear-resistant 310 s stainless steel and have an overall length of 152 
mm, an inner wall diameter of 254 mm, an average wall thickness of 6 
mm, and a baffle height of 51 mm (see Fig. 3). During testing, the cyl­
inders are rotated at a constant rate of 60 r/min for a certain time, using 
400 g of particles to better match actual operating conditions in the 
system. Before and after the attrition characteristic test, the particles are 
sieved and weighed, using a 50-mesh sieve for separation. All data 
acquisition occurs under standard ambient humidity and temperature 
conditions. Supporting Information provides a detailed description of 
the calculation of attrition ratio and attrition rate of particles. 
Moreover, the particle size of the initial samples and the samples 
subjected to attrition characteristic test (without sieving) was analyzed 
using a LS-13–320-XR particle size analyzer (BECKMAN COULTER). The 
elemental distribution of particles was analyzed using a scanning elec­
tron microscope combined with an energy-dispersive spectrometer 
(SEM-EDS). 
2.3. Long-term reaction performance test 
Long-term reaction performance test was conducted in a muffle 
furnace to analyze reaction performance evolution of oxida­
tion–reduction cycles (800 cycles) of SiC-doped (Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3 parti­
cles. During the reaction performance test, the particles were exposed to 
an ambient air atmosphere, which is consistent with the actual situation 
in CSP. Each cycle includes a heating segment and a cooling segment, 
with temperature settings at 600 oC - 1100 oC - 600 oC, corresponding 
to heat absorption and release processes of particles in CSP system, 
respectively [12]. Besides, considering the temperature difference 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of the implementation of strengthen Mn-Fe particles in the CSP system.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 4 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
4
between the set temperature during the cooling process in the muffle 
furnaces and the actual sample temperature, lowering the temperature 
to 600 ◦C ensures complete oxidation reaction. Long-term redox cycles 
were carried out to obtain samples for reaction performance degradation 
analysis, and a simultaneous thermal analyzer (TGA/DSC 3+, METTER 
TOLEDO) was used to test the reduction and oxidation performance of 
strengthen particles after different cycles at air atmosphere with a 50 
mL min−1 gas flow rate, providing a data basis for quantifying reaction 
performance degradation. The calculation of reduction and oxidation 
conversion are shown in Supporting Information. The XRD analysis was 
performed with a PANalytical B.V. (Netherland) X-pert Powder 
diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation) in the diffraction angle (2θ) range of 
10–80◦with a step of 0.02◦and 30 s counting time per angle. The crystal 
phases were identified by using the ICDD PDF-4 database 
3. Characteristics analysis of particle preparation process 
3.1. Analysis of water content 
The water content is measured by comparing the mass changes 
before and after drying for 4 h at 150 ◦C, as shown in Fig. 4. The water 
content was measured for mixed powder (wet), columnar objects, wet 
particles, and dried particles. It can be seen that the initial particle water 
content is about 18%, which gradually decreases during the granulation 
process. The main dehydration process occurs during drying, and the 
particle water content drops to <1% after drying. 
Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of the main granulation steps for (Mn0.8Fe0.2)2O3 particles.  
Fig. 3. Cylindrical drum attrition characteristic test apparatus.  
Fig. 4. Water content of different SiC-doped materials.  
Fig. 5. Particle size of different ratio of SiC-doped materials during particle 
preparation. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 5 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
5
3.2. Analysis of particle size 
Particle size test was conducted on wet particles, dried particles, and 
synthesized particles, as shown in Fig. 5. It can be seen that the particle 
size changes of the four materials exhibit similar patterns. After drying, 
the particle size slightly increases due to the evaporation of water. 
During high-temperature treatment, synthesis of Mn-Fe oxide occurs, 
and microcrystalline cellulose is carbonized at high temperature, lead­
ing to further particle shrinkage and a decrease in particle size after 
high-temperature treatment. Particle size distribution data are provided 
in the Supporting Information. 
4. Attrition characteristic 
To investigate the attrition of Mn-Fe particles in CSP plants, it is 
necessary to first analyze their dissipated energy and attrition ratio 
based on attrition characteristic tests. Based on this, a correlation can be 
established with the attrition process in CSP plants. 
4.1. Model of dissipated energy of particles attrition 
When particles collide, energy dissipation mainly occurs in the 
contact area between the particle and the impacted surface. Part of the 
energy is used to change the kinetic energy of both the particle and the 
impacted surface. When particles slide, energy dissipation mainly occurs 
in the frictional contact area between the particle and the sliding sur­
face. The energy is consumed to overcome the resistance caused by 
friction. These indicate that attrition is essentially an energy dissipation 
problem [24]. Huq, Celis, Fouvry, Mohrbacher, and others have pro­
posed methods to calculate attrition volume and verified a linear rela­
tionship between attrition volume V and dissipated energy E expressed 
as Eq. (1) [17,25–26,33]. 
V = KcE
(1) 
Here, Kc is the factor which describes the volume of attrition per unit 
of energy consumed. The exact value depends on factors such as the 
physical properties, the attrition conditions and the test method. In 
subsequent calculations, the Kc value is assumed to be equal. 
Archard considers the plasticized contact between materials where 
the contact area is the ratio of the normal force to the material hardness, 
and defined the frictional attrition volume loss Vfric as Eq. (2) [5]. 
Vfric = kf
3
NL
Hf
= Kfric ˆA⋅LcosθN
(2) 
Here, kf is the coefficient showing the probability that the micro 
protrusions on the surface will be sheared off, N is the normal force, L is 
the relative sliding distance, Hf is the hardness of the particles and θN is 
the angle between force and normal direction. Kfric is coefficient of the 
frictional attrition volume loss. In subsequent calculations, the Kfric value 
is assumed to be equal. 
In impact attrition analysis, the volume loss can be defined by sub­
surface transverse cracks, and free surfaces can easily be separated from 
the impact site to form particle fines. [29]. Based on indentation fracture 
mechanics, the volume of particle fines can be estimated from the depth 
and length of transverse cracks. Accordingly, they propose the Eq. (3) to 
estimate the impacted attrition volume loss Vimp [18]. 
Vimp = kimp
ρv2
impl4Hf
K2
ft
= Kimp ˆA⋅v2
imp
(3) 
Here, kimp is the proportionality factor, the properties of the particle 
including density ρ, linear particle size l, hardness Hf, fracture toughness 
Kft, and the normal velocity υimp. Kimp is coefficient of the impacted 
attrition volume loss. In subsequent calculations, the Kimp value is 
assumed to be equal. 
The cumulative dissipated energy of a single particle circulating in 
the cylindrical drum is as Eq. (4). 
Esum = Eimp + Efric
(4) 
The cumulative energy E of Mn-Fe particles in the cylindrical drum 
was simulated using EDEM software based on particles movement 
analysis. The simulation parameters, such as the device size, particle 
sphericity, particle size, and particle friction coefficient, were set to be 
consistent with those of the experimental apparatus and actual particles 
characteristics. The contact model between the particles and the wall 
was based on the Hertz-Mindlin model, with standard rolling friction 
and relative attrition models employed as additional models [38]. The 
cumulative energy E due to particle impact and friction acting on the 
inner wall and baffle wall of the cylinder was estimated, and the degree 
of attrition was quantified accordingly. 
4.2. Analysis of particle attrition in the cylindrical drum 
The process and simulation results of one rotation cycle (1 s) of the 
particles in the cylindrical drum are shown in Fig. 6. During each 
rotation cycle, most particles undergo two collisions with the cylinder, 
as indicated in Fig. 6a–d for the first collision, and Fig. 6e–h for the 
second collision. As shown in Fig. 6a–d, the particles fall from the top 
surface under gravity, collide with the bottom surface and experienced 
their first collision with the inner wall. The height of the particle’s initial 
position affects its landing point, with a wide range of possible landing 
points. As shown in Fig. 6e–f, after falling to the bottom, the particles 
move towards the middle of the cylinder due to static friction, main­
taining a relatively thin layer without significant accumulation. As 
shown in Fig. 6g, when the frictional force is insufficient to support 
further upward movement, the particle begins to fall again, colliding 
with the baffle, resulting in the second collision. As shown in Fig. 6h, the 
particle forms an accumulation pile under the push of the baffle and 
continues to move upward. This is reflected in the layer of particles, 
which becomes thicker from the middle position, eventually stabilizing 
in thickness, completing one cycle. The observed patterns of two colli­
sions match well with the simulation results. To facilitate calculation, 
the movement of the particles in the cylindrical drum was simplified as 
follows: the particles fall to the bottom under gravity, experience the 
first attrition (impact attrition), then move towards the middle of the 
cylindrical drum, where the frictional force is insufficient to support 
them, causing relative displacement (friction attrition), before colliding 
with the baffle for the second time (impact attrition). Finally, pushed by 
the baffle, they move towards the top, completing a cycle. 
As shown in Fig. 7a, the average velocity of particles in the 
Fig. 6. One rotation cycle of the particles in the cylindrical drum: (a)-(h) 
simulation results of attrition test and (i)-(p) rotation process. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 6 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
6
cylindrical drum was obtained through simulation. The first collision of 
two collisions can be regarded as the particle falling from a height D (the 
inner diameter of the cylindrical drum) and colliding with the cylin­
drical wall, with the velocity increasing from 0.76 m/s to 1.87 m/s and 
then the velocity falling back after the collision. The second collision 
occurs when the particle collides with the baffle. When the particle 
reaches the middle of the cylinder, it no longer continues to move up­
ward with the cylinder, and its velocity gradually decreases from 0.76 
m/s to 0. Subsequently, under the influence of gravity, the particle slides 
downward and its velocity gradually increases. The velocity before 
colliding with the baffle is 0.32 m/s. 
As shown by two particle flow field in Fig. 7a, the angle between the 
particle and the wall of the cylindrical drum at the first collision is about 
55◦, and the particle is nearly perpendicular to the baffle at the second 
collision, and the particle is hedged against the baffle, and the sum of the 
rates of the particle and the baffle is considered to be the normal ve­
locity. The velocities of the two collisions are 1.53 and 1.18 m/s, 
respectively. As shown in the Fig. 7b, the collisions of the particle were 
simulated and the cumulative dissipated energy was calculated. Analysis 
of particle motion reveals that average impacted attrition dissipated 
energy of the two collisions are 3.65 × 10−3 J and 2.05 × 10−3 J per 
rotation, while average frictional attrition dissipated energy is 8.00 ×
10−4 J per rotation. The cumulative attrition energy Esum for one hour is 
23.4 J. The impacted volume loss per rotation Vimp is 3.74 Kimp, whereas 
the volume loss attributed to frictional attrition Vwear is 4.30 × 10−2 Kfric. 
4.3. Results of long-term attrition characteristic test 
Long-term attrition characteristics were characterized via a com­
parison of attrition rates (AR) and remaining mass ratios (MR). Expla­
nations and calculation methods for AR and MR are provided in the 
Supporting Information. Undoped Mn-Fe particles prepared in this study 
exhibited a high attrition rate, with a mass loss of approximately 55.4% 
after 120 h of attrition test in cylindrical drum apparatus. To enhance 
the attrition resistance, three types of SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles were 
prepared and subjected to a total of 120 h of attrition test, equivalent to 
4.32 × 105 rotations. As shown in Fig. 8, the with 5% SiC doped particle 
had an attrition rate of 0.0417%/h and mass loss of 3.26% after 120 h. 
Although 0.5% SiC doped exhibited a higher attrition rate during the 
initial 8 h, the attrition rate decreased significantly after 20 h test, with a 
final attrition rate of 0.0281%/h and mass loss of 5.00% after 120 h test. 
The attrition characteristics of 1% SiC doped particles was further 
improved, with an attrition rate of 0.0156%/h and mass loss of 1.87% at 
120 h. SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles showed a significant improvement in 
attrition resistance compared to the original Mn-Fe particles. 
4.4. Analysis of the reinforcement mechanism for SiC-doped particles 
During attrition test, particles are susceptible to fracture due to the 
impact of attrition mechanisms, resulting in the formation of several 
sub-particles of similar size to the parent particle, or delamination wear, 
in which surface edges, protrusions, depressions, and other features are 
gradually worn down or chipped away, forming small particles and 
particle fines [50]. The attrition process is the gradual breaking of 
particles or detachment of surface layers, and their attrition resistance is 
not related to their hardness, but rather depends on their material 
toughness [37]. When the SiC doping ratio was increased from 0.5 wt% 
to 1 wt%, its attrition resistance was enhanced. Based on Fig. 9(a)-(b), 
Fig. 7. (a) Average velocity of particles in the cylindrical drum. (b) The cumulative dissipated energy.  
Fig. 8. Attrition rate and remaining mass ratio of (a) all Mn-Fe particles and (b) SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 7 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
7
the reason for this can be analyzed: the distribution density of SiC in Mn- 
Fe particles gradually increases, and since SiC has a high Peierls stress, it 
can resist lattice distortion, while SiC crystal grains can offset cracks 
during the fracture process, impeding crack development and improving 
the attrition resistance of Mn-Fe particles. However, when the SiC ratio 
was increased from 1 wt% to 5 wt%, based on Fig. 9(b)-(c), the reason 
for the decrease in attrition resistance can be analyzed. Due to the higher 
activity of SiC, excessive doping may cause aggregation during powder 
preparation, resulting in flocculation in particles, leading to the for­
mation of defects such as pores, dislocations, and stress concentration, 
providing a path for crack propagation and reducing particle attrition 
resistance [37]. This is also consistent with the results of attrition tests, 
as the initial attrition rate for 5 wt% particles was slower than for 0.5 wt 
% particles. As attrition proceeded and cracks developed, the attrition 
rate for 5 wt% particles became faster than for 0.5 wt% particles. 
4.5. Results of particle size distribution of long-term attrition 
characteristic test 
During attrition characteristic tests, the average size of particles 
gradually decreases due to attrition. Some particles become too small to 
flow when their size decreases below the mesh size, rendering them 
unsuitable for use. Therefore, the attrition characteristic test is based on 
changes in particle size distribution. There exists a close relationship 
between changes in particle size distribution and attrition characteris­
tics, highlighting the need for further research on particle size 
distribution. 
As shown in Fig. 10, this study examined the particle size distribution 
of 0.5 wt% SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles after attrition tests. The particles 
had a wide particle size distribution with a median particle size of 805 
μm and were divided into 16 particle size intervals, each characterized 
by its midpoint. After 120 h of attrition testing, the median particle size 
was 748 μm. The smallest size interval is composed of particles sieved. 
At the beginning of attrition, the transition from large particle size in­
tervals (1199–1741 μm) to intermediate (623–1198 μm) and small 
particle size intervals (<622 μm) was dominant, resulting in an increase 
in the proportion of particles in the intermediate and small particle size 
intervals. As attrition continued, the transition from intermediate par­
ticle size intervals to small particle size intervals and even the sieving 
interval became dominant, resulting in a gradual decrease in the pro­
portion of particles in the intermediate particle size interval. The par­
ticle size intervals that dominated the transition in the particle size 
distribution were different, resulting in the change in the distribution 
pattern not remaining constant over time. 
The results of particle size distribution indicate that the highest 
proportion of 0.5 wt% SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles’ transformation occurs 
in the size range of 568–750 µm. This suggests that the attrition mech­
anism of the particles during the long-term attrition test is mainly 
dominated by fragmentation. 
5. Reaction performance 
5.1. Reaction characterization of different SiC-doped ratio 
The XRD patterns of different SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles are shown 
in Fig. 11(a). All synthesized samples exhibit distinct reflections of (Mn, 
Fe)2O3 (bixbyite, ICCD 00-041-1442), indicating a uniform formation of 
the continuous solid solution. The XRD patterns of SiC-doped samples 
show peak of SiC (Synthetic, ICCD 97-002-4217). Due to the low content 
of SiC, its peak is not very significant, as further demonstrated in Fig. 11 
(b)-(c). 
To investigate the effect of SiC doping on the reaction performance of 
Mn-Fe particles, the reduction and oxidation reaction performance of 
Mn-Fe particles doped with different ratio of SiC were compared in the 
first cycle, as shown in Fig. 12. As the SiC doping proportion increased, 
the particles maintained a relatively fast reaction rate, achieving rapid 
oxidation and reduction. However, the conversion of the strength par­
ticles gradually decreased, with maximum conversion of 95.7%, 90.4%, 
and 33.7% for 0.5%, 1%, and 5% SiC doping, respectively. The particles 
doped with 0.5% and 1% SiC showed better reaction performance than 
those doped with 5% SiC. All strength particles exhibited good re- 
oxidation ability, with almost complete re-oxidation of the reduced 
portion. 
Fig. 9. SEM images and corresponding EDS elemental mappings of (a) 0.5 wt%, (b) 1 wt%, (c) 5 wt%.  
Fig. 10. 0.5 wt% SiC-doped particle size distribution of different attrition test.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 8 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
8
5.2. Results of cycling performance 
To investigate the evolution in reaction cycling performance of Mn- 
Fe particles doped with 0%, 0.5%, and 1% SiC after long-term cycling, 
800 cycles were performed. The XRD patterns of different SiC-doped 
Mn-Fe particles after cycling test are presented in Figs. S1–S3 of the 
Supporting Information. The results demonstrate that SiC can exist 
stably in Mn-Fe particles during long-term cycling processes. The 
undoped Mn-Fe particles and those doped with 0.5% and 1% SiC showed 
a decrease of the oxidation conversion after the 800th cycle, to 87.4%, 
91.7%, and 82.3%, respectively. As power generation and heat release 
are directly related, the evolution of the oxidation performance during 
the cycles was further fitted, as shown in Fig. 13(d). The long-term 
cycling of all three types of particles exhibited a trend of initially fast 
and then slow deterioration in oxidative reactivity. 
6. Replenishment model for CSP plants 
6.1. Models of replenishment strategy for CSP plants 
In CSP plants, the gradual decrease in mass of Mn-Fe particles due to 
fine particle sieving, coupled with their deteriorating redox reaction 
performance over time, results in a decline in heat storage capacity. 
Thus, the particle replenishing is necessary. Furthermore, for particles 
strengthen through doping, although their attrition resistance perfor­
mance improves, their reaction performance gradually decreases. 
Selecting the appropriate particle type presents a challenge, necessi­
tating the introduction of a new indicator for comprehensive evaluation. 
The total replenishment mass over long-term operation can provide an 
intuitive reference for particle type selection. Moreover, due to non- 
uniform deterioration rates of mass loss and reaction performance, 
replenished particles will be at different stages of evolution, resulting in 
varying loss rates. This further complicates the periodic replenishment 
process, underscoring the need to develop effective replenishment 
strategies. 
The remaining heat storage capacity of particles before the nt 
replenishment can be calculated using Eq. (5) as follows: 
Hremain,t = H0 ˆA⋅
∑nt−1
i=0 αm,i,t ˆA⋅αh,i,t
(5) 
Here, H0 is the initial heat storage capacity of particles, nt represents 
the tth replenishments, αm,i,t and αh,i,t represents the remaining mass ratio 
and the remaining heat storage capacity ratio of the ith replenishment 
particles before the nt replenishment. When i = 0, it corresponds to the 
addition of original particles into the system. 
The calculation of αh is as follows: 
αh = HTCE + HSH,0
HTCE,0 + HSH,0
(6) 
Here, HTCE is the current heat storage capacity of the thermochemical 
reaction, which is proportional to the conversion of the oxidation. HTCE,0 
is the original thermochemical heat storage density (oxidation reaction 
enthalpy), set as 202 kJ/kg. And HSH,0 is the original sensible heat 
storage density, set as 525 kJ/kg (400–1000 ◦C). 
To maintain the system’s heat storage capacity at the design value by 
replenishing particles, the required replenishment mass corresponds to 
the heat storage capacity ΔHnt as shown in Eq. (7). 
ΔHnt = H0 −Hremain,nt
(7) 
The heat storage replenishment ratio compared to the original heat 
storage capacity kH,nt is calculated as Eq. (8). 
kH,nt = ΔHnt
H0
(8) 
The calculation of the replenishment mass of particles Δmnt is as Eq. 
(9). 
Δmnt =
ΔHnt
HTCE,0 + HSH,0
(9) 
Fig. 11. XRD patterns of Mn-Fe particles doped with different ratios of SiC. (a) 10o-80o, (b) 35◦−36.5o, (c) 58◦−62o.  
Fig. 12. Reaction performance comparison of different SiC-doped Mn- 
Fe particles. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 9 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
9
The total mass of particles in the system after replenishment mnt is as 
follows, 
mnt = mremain,nt + Δmnt
(10) 
Here, mremain,nt is the remaining particle mass before the ntth 
replenishment. 
The replenishment mass ratio km,nt compared to the original mass is 
calculated as Eq. (11). 
km,nt = Δmnt
m0
(11) 
Here, m0 is the original total mass. 
The total replenishment mass ratio in the system ksum m,nt is 
expressed as Eq. (12). 
ksum m,nt =
∑nt
i=1km,nt
(12) 
The average annual replenishment rates krep,annu is calculated as 
follow, 
krep,annu = ksum m,nt
nyear
(13) 
Here, nyear is operation year. 
6.2. Models of attrition conversion factor of CSP plants 
To further analyze particle attrition in CSP plants and obtain dissi­
pated energy of attrition, it is necessary to calculate the energy dissi­
pation processes of particles in each device [4,12,19]. Circulating 
particles flow through the particle receiver, hot particle storage, heat 
exchanger, cold particle storage, particle elevator, and interconnecting 
pipelines. As particle attrition differs among devices, their attrition 
processes must be analyzed separately. The analysis of particle flow and 
reaction processes, as well as the calculation of dissipated energy in CSP 
plants, are presented in the Supporting Information. The sum of attrition 
for all devices represents the accumulated attrition. 
To establish a correlation between attrition characteristics obtained 
from the cylindrical drum attrition characteristic test apparatus and 
attrition processes in CSP plants, this study proposes an attrition con­
version factor R by analyzing the energy dissipation of both attrition 
processes. With coefficient R, attrition process of particles in CSP plants 
can be predict based on long-term attrition test from cylindrical drum 
attrition characteristic test apparatus. R is defined as the ratio of attri­
tion time of particles between the CSP plant and the cylindrical drum 
attrition characteristic test apparatus, which can also be defined as the 
ratio of dissipated energy of attrition, as shown in Eq. (14). 
R =
˙ECSP
˙Ecyl
==
˙VCSP
˙Vcyl
(14) 
Here, ˙Ecsp is the total dissipated energy of particle attrition of CSP 
plant, and ˙Ecyl is of cylindrical drum, ˙Vcsp is the total volume loss of 
particle attrition of CSP plant, and ˙Vcyl is of cylindrical drum. 
To analyze the attrition of Mn-Fe particles in CSP plants, this study 
focused on the 125 MWe CSP plant designed by Buck et al. [12]. The 
dissipated energy and volume loss of each equipment were calculated 
based on the its geometric parameters of and the flow process of parti­
cles. The total dissipated energy of attrition of the CSP plant and the 
conversion factor R were obtained. 
For the 125 MWe CSP system, a multi-tower configuration consisting 
of 14 solar tower modules is used. The storage capacity of a single 
module is 249 MWh, and the designed power of the absorber is 50 MWth 
[12]. The system also includes a heliostat field (869 heliostats), heat 
exchanger, and storage and transport system. The geometric parameters, 
attrition volume loss, and attrition dissipated energy are listed in 
Table S1, Supporting Information. The attrition conversion factor of 125 
Fig. 13. Long-term reaction performance test of SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles. (a) 0 wt% (b) 0.5% wt.% (c) 1%, (d) fitting curve.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 10 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
10
MWe system R125MW is 0.0780. 
6.3. Replenishment strategy for 125 MW CSP plants 
To ensure that the heat storage capacity of particles in the system 
meets operational requirements, this study analyzed particle replen­
ishment strategies, including particle replenishment rates and total 
replenishment mass ratio, for undoped, 0.5% SiC-doped, and 1% SiC- 
doped Mn-Fe particles in 125 MWe CSP systems. The analysis relied 
on a attrition conversion factor R, particle reaction performance evo­
lution, and attrition characteristic evolution, all integrated into a par­
ticle replenishment model. The original particle storage corresponds to a 
12-hour storage capacity [12], and the particles undergo one flow cycle 
and one reaction cycle per day in the system, with daily replenishment. 
The total operating time is 25 years [12]. The calculation results are 
presented in Fig. 14. 
As shown in Fig. 14(a) and (b), for the 125 MWe CSP system, the 
particle replenishment rates of particles gradually decrease and even­
tually stabilize, while the total replenishment mass ratio initially in­
creases rapidly and gradually tends to linear growth. The particle 
replenishment rates for undoped, 0.5% SiC-doped, and 1% SiC-doped 
Mn-Fe particles stabilize at 3.04 × 10−4, 2.87 × 10−5, and 1.69 × 10−5 
per day, respectively. And the total replenishment mass ratio over the 
25-year are 3.56 times, 0.316 times, and 0.248 times the original total 
particle mass (excluding the original total particle mass), with average 
annual replenishment rates krep,annu [19] of 1.43 × 10−1, 1.26 × 10−2, 
and 9.94 × 10−3, respectively. 
It can be observed that the SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles show a sig­
nificant decrease in particle replenishment rates and total replenishment 
mass ratio, both of which decrease by approximately one order of 
magnitude after SiC doping reinforcement. This is beneficial for 
reducing the cost of particle inventory and improving the LCOE of the 
system [9,12,23]. Since this study focuses on the replenishment strategy, 
and the influence of SiC doping on storage capacity is relatively small, 
the analysis mainly revolves around the amount of replenishment. If the 
worn particles are sieved and recycled to regenerate new particles, the 
cost of replenishment can be further reduced. Assuming that the cost of 
Mn-Fe particle fabrication is 10% of the material cost, and based on the 
research of Buck et al. [12], the break-even prices were further corrected 
to 1.606, 1.221 and 1.213 €/kg for undoped, 0.5% SiC-doped, and 1% 
SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles of 125 MWe CSP system. It can be seen that 
compared with undoped particles, adopting strengthen particle can 
significantly reduce the cost of particle inventory. 
6.4. Further research based on replenishment model 
To further analyzing the influence of different factors on particle 
replenishment of CSP plants, this study focuses on three key parameters: 
reaction cycling performance, attrition characteristic, and reaction 
enthalpy. With the superior properties of 0.5 wt% and 1 wt% SiC-doped 
Mn-Fe particles as shown above, the replenishment process of both 
particles under different parameters was analyzed and compared based 
on 125 MW CSP plant. 
6.4.1. Reaction cycling performance deterioration rate 
Based on the reaction cycling performance of SiC-doped particles, 
eight groups of deterioration rates ranging from 0.1× to 10× were set up 
for comparison. Here, 10× represents a deterioration rate where the 
deterioration ratio of reaction cycling performance after one redox re­
action is equivalent to that of ten times the original reaction (Mn-Fe 
particles), indicating an accelerated deterioration based on time, rather 
than a simple ten times loss ratio. Similarly, 0.1× represents a deterio­
ration ratio where the deterioration ratio of ten reactions is equivalent to 
that of one single original reaction (Mn-Fe particles). 
As shown in Fig. 15, the total replenishment mass ratio of both 
particles will gradually increase as the deterioration rate of reaction 
cycling performance increases from 0.1× to 10×. This is easily under­
standable since, as the deterioration rate of reaction cycling perfor­
mance accelerates, the system’s heat storage capacity also decreases 
faster, resulting in an increasing need for replenishment. Furthermore, 
at different deteriorate rates, the total replenishment mass ratio of 1 wt 
% SiC-doped particle is always lower than that of 0.5 wt%. 
6.4.2. Attrition characteristic 
Based on the attrition characteristic of SiC-doped particles, eight 
groups of attrition rates ranging from 0.1× to 10×were compared. The 
meaning of attrition rate is similar to deteriorate rate mentioned above. 
As shown in Fig. 16, as the attrition rate increases from 0.1× to 10×, the 
total replenishment mass ratio of both particles gradually increases 
similarly to the previous section. However, when the deteriorate rate is 
relatively small, the total replenishment mass ratio of 0.5 wt% SiC- 
doped particles is lower than that of 1 wt%, as the reaction perfor­
mance deterioration plays the dominant impact when the attrition rate 
slows down. In this case, the reaction cycling performance of 0.5 wt% 
particles were superior to that of the 1 wt%, leading to less particle 
replenishment. As the attrition rate accelerates, attrition characteristic 
predominates, and thus the total replenishment mass ratio of 1 wt% 
particles become relatively less. 
6.4.3. Reaction enthalpy 
As a key parameter of TCES materials, it is necessary to analyze the 
impact of reaction enthalpy on the replenishment process. As shown in 
Fig. 17(a)–(c), the total replenishment mass ratio is calculated based on 
the initial particles adding into the system. It can be seen that as the 
Fig. 14. Particle replenishment of (a) all Mn-Fe particles of 125 MW CSP system, (b) SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles of 125 MW CSP system.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 11 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
11
Fig. 15. Total replenishment mass ratio under different reaction cycling performance deteriorate rates. (a) 0.5 wt%, (b) 1 wt%, (c) Comparison.  
Fig. 16. Total replenishment mass ratio under different attrition characteristic. (a) 0.5 wt%, (b) 1 wt%, (c) Comparison.  
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 12 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
12
reaction enthalpy increases, the proportion of replenishment relative to 
the initial particle mass gradually increases. This is because the higher 
the reaction enthalpy, the higher its proportion in thermal energy 
storage density. Under the same reaction cycling performance deterio­
ration rate, the loss of system’s heat storage capacity is also greater, and 
the required particle supplementation is also correspondingly higher. 
Based on Fig. 17(c), it can be seen that when the reaction enthalpy is 
relatively low (<420 kJ/kg), 1 wt% SiC-doped particles have an 
advantage. As the reaction enthalpy further increases, 0.5 wt% SiC- 
doped particles are more advantageous. The total replenishment mass 
ratio in Fig. 17(d)–(e) is calculated based on the initial mass of Mn-Fe 
particles in the system. Referring to Fig. 17(e), similarly, when the 
reaction enthalpy is relatively low, 1 wt% SiC-doped particles have an 
advantage. After further increasing the reaction enthalpy, 0.5 wt% SiC- 
doped particles are more advantageous. However, the total replenish­
ment curve is not monotonically increasing, showing a trend of first 
increasing and then decreasing. This is because when the reaction 
enthalpy is relatively low, the increase in energy density results in a 
smaller proportion of decrease in the total particle mass, while the 
growth rate of particle replenishment due to the loss of reaction per­
formance is faster. As the reaction enthalpy keeps increasing and reaches 
the peak of total replenishment mass ratio, the increase in energy den­
sity results in a higher proportion of decrease in the total replenishment 
mass, while the corresponding proportion of particle replenishment due 
Fig. 17. Total replenishment mass ratio under different reaction enthalpy. Based on the initial particles, (a) 0.5 wt%, (b) 1 wt%, (c) Comparison. Based on the initial 
mass of Mn-Fe particles, (d) 0.5 wt%, (e) 1 wt%, (f) Comparison. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 13 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
13
to the loss of reaction performance decreases, resulting in a changing 
trend as shown in Fig. 17(e). 
7. Conclusion 
SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles with varying doping ratios demonstrated 
improved attrition resistance and long-term reaction cycle characteris­
tics, which are advantageous for the long-term stable operation and 
economic improvement of CSP systems. Doping at 0.5 wt%, 1 wt%, and 
5 wt% resulted in mass loss ratios of 5.00%, 1.87%, and 3.26% (120 h 
test), respectively, compared to the undoped Mn-Fe particle’s mass loss 
of 53.5% (96 h test). Additionally, undoped and 0.5% and 1% SiC-doped 
particles exhibited good cycle performance, with oxidation conversion 
of 87.4%, 91.7%, and 82.3%, respectively, after 800 cycles. However, 
increased strength through doping led to decreased reaction perfor­
mance, posing a challenge for selecting particles in CSP systems. To 
address this issue, a new indicator was proposed: the total replenishment 
mass ratio. Correlation analysis between attrition testing and CSP sys­
tem flow process underpins the replenishment strategies required to 
maintain heat storage capacity. Simulation-based studies on attrition 
volume loss and energy dissipation provided insights into the relation­
ship between attrition characteristics and the CSP system operation. 
Based on replenishment strategy, strengthened Mn-Fe particles showed 
reduced replenishment rates by one order of magnitude relative to 
undoped particles. Specifically, the average annual replenishment rates 
were 14.3%, 1.26%, and 0.994% for undoped and 0.5 wt% and 1 wt% 
SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles, respectively, in a 125 MWe CSP system over 
a 25-year operation period. This reduction in particle replenishment 
rates can significantly reduce particle inventory and break-even prices, 
contributing to a lowered CSP system LCOE and promoting wider use of 
renewable energy sources. 
This study provides crucial insights into the development of ther­
mochemical energy storage, facilitating more extensive utilization of 
solar energy to meet future energy needs. Improved attrition resistance 
achieved by SiC-doped Mn-Fe particles can reduce particle fines, ensure 
continuous particle flow, and lower system replenishment rates, thereby 
contributing to the wider adoption of renewable energy sources. 
Declaration of Competing Interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52176207), Key R&D Pro­
gram of Zhejiang (NO. 2022C01043) and the Fundamental Research 
Funds for the Central Universities (2022ZFJH004). 
References 
[1] Abad, A., Mendiara, T., Izquierdo, M.T., de Diego, L.F., García-Labiano, F., 
Gay´an, P., Ad´anez, J., 2021. Evaluation of the redox capability of manganese- 
titanium mixed oxides for thermochemical energy storage and chemical looping 
processes. Fuel Process. Technol. 211, 106579 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
fuproc.2020.106579. 
[2] Agrafiotis, C., Block, T., Senholdt, M., Tescari, S., Roeb, M., Sattler, C., 2017. 
Exploitation of thermochemical cycles based on solid oxide redox systems for 
thermochemical storage of solar heat. Part 6: Testing of Mn-based combined oxides 
and porous structures. Sol. Energy 149, 227–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2017.03.083. 
[3] Al-Shankiti, I.A., Ehrhart, B.D., Ward, B.J., Bayon, A., Wallace, M.A., Bader, R., 
Kreider, P., Weimer, A.W., 2019. Particle design and oxidation kinetics of iron- 
manganese oxide redox materials for thermochemical energy storage. Sol. Energy 
183, 17–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2019.02.071. 
[4] Almendros-Ib´a˜nez, J.A., Fern´andez-Torrijos, M., Díaz-Heras, M., Belmonte, J.F., 
Sobrino, C., 2019. A review of solar thermal energy storage in beds of particles: 
Packed and fluidized beds. Sol. Energy 192, 193–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2018.05.047. 
[5] J.F. Archard Research Laboratory, Associated Electrical Industries Limited, 
Aldermaston, Berkshire, England Contact and Rubbing of Flat Surfaces Journal of 
Applied Physics 24 8 1953 1953 981 988. 
[6] Azimi, G., Leion, H., Mattisson, T., Ryd´en, M., Snijkers, F., Lyngfelt, A., 2014. 
Mn–Fe oxides with support of MgAl 2 O 4 , CeO 2 , ZrO 2 and Y 2 O 3 –ZrO 2 for 
chemical-looping combustion and chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling. Ind. 
Eng. Chem. Res. 53 (25), 10358–10365. 
[7] Azimi, G., Mattisson, T., Leion, H., Ryd´en, M., Lyngfelt, A., 2015. Comprehensive 
study of Mn–Fe–Al oxygen-carriers for chemical-looping with oxygen uncoupling 
(CLOU). Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control 34, 12–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijggc.2014.12.022. 
[8] Bagepalli, M.V., Jeong, S.Y., Brooks, J.D., Zhang, Z.M., Ranjan, D., Loutzenhiser, P. 
G., 2022. Experimental characterization of extreme temperature granular flows for 
solar thermal energy transport and storage. Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 248, 
112020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2022.112020. 
[9] Bayon, A., Bader, R., Jafarian, M., Fedunik-Hofman, L., Sun, Y., Hinkley, J., 
Miller, S., Lipi´nski, W., 2018. Techno-economic assessment of solid–gas 
thermochemical energy storage systems for solar thermal power applications. 
Energy 149, 473–484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2017.11.084. 
[10] Bielsa, D., Oregui, M., Arias, P.L., 2022. New insights into Mn2O3 based metal 
oxide granulation technique with enhanced chemical and mechanical stability for 
thermochemical energy storage in packed bed reactors. Sol. Energy 241, 248–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.06.010. 
[11] Bielsa, D., Zaki, A., Arias, P.L., Faik, A., 2020. Improving the redox performance of 
Mn2O3/Mn3O4 pair by Si doping to be used as thermochemical energy storage for 
concentrated solar power plants. Sol. Energy 204, 144–154. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.solener.2020.04.073. 
[12] Buck, R., Agrafiotis, C., Tescari, S., Neumann, N., Schmücker, M., 2021. Techno- 
economic analysis of candidate oxide materials for thermochemical storage in 
concentrating solar power systems. Front. Energy Res. 9 https://doi.org/10.3389/ 
fenrg.2021.694248. 
[13] Carrillo, A.J., Chinchilla, L.E., Iglesias-Juez, A., Guti´errez-Rubio, S., Sastre, D., 
Pizarro, P., Hungría, A.B., Coronado, J.M., 2021. Determining the role of Fe-doping 
on promoting the thermochemical energy storage performance of (Mn1−xFex)3O4 
spinels. Small Methods 5 (10), 2100550. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
smtd.202100550. 
[14] Carrillo, A.J., Gonz´alez-Aguilar, J., Romero, M., Coronado, J.M., 2019. Solar 
Energy on demand: a review on high temperature thermochemical heat storage 
systems and materials. Chem. Rev. 119 (7), 4777–4816. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
acs.chemrev.8b00315. 
[15] Carrillo, A.J., Serrano, D.P., Pizarro, P., Coronado, J.M., 2016. Understanding 
redox kinetics of iron-doped manganese oxides for high temperature 
thermochemical energy storage. J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (49), 27800–27812. https:// 
doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b08708. 
[16] Dizaji, H.B., Hosseini, H., 2018. A review of material screening in pure and mixed- 
metal oxide thermochemical energy storage (TCES) systems for concentrated solar 
power (CSP) applications. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 98, 9–26. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.rser.2018.09.004. 
[17] Fouvry, S., Kapsa, P., Vincent, L., 1996. Quantification of fretting damage. Wear 
200 (1), 186–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1648(96)07306-1. 
[18] Ghadiri, M., Zhang, Z., 2002. Impact attrition of particulate solids. Part 1: A 
theoretical model of chipping. Chem. Eng. Sci. 57 (17), 3659–3669. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0009-2509(02)00240-3. 
[19] Gorman, B.T., Lanzarini-Lopes, M., Johnson, N.G., Miller, J.E., Stechel, E.B., 2021. 
Techno-economic analysis of a concentrating solar power plant using redox-active 
metal oxides as heat transfer fluid and storage media. Front. Energy Res. 9. 
[20] Guo, R., Takasu, H., Funayama, S., Shinoda, Y., Tajika, M., Harada, T., Kato, Y., 
2022. Mechanical stability and heat transfer improvement of CaO-based composite 
pellets for thermochemical energy storage. Chem. Eng. Sci. 255, 117674 https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ces.2022.117674. 
[21] Hamidi, M., Wheeler, V.M., Gao, X., Pye, J., Catchpole, K., Weimer, A.W., 2020. 
Reduction of iron–manganese oxide particles in a lab-scale packed-bed reactor for 
thermochemical energy storage. Chem. Eng. Sci. 221, 115700 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ces.2020.115700. 
[22] Han, X., Wang, L., Ling, H., Ge, Z., Lin, X., Dai, X., Chen, H., 2022. Critical review 
of thermochemical energy storage systems based on cobalt, manganese, and copper 
oxides. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 158, 112076 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2022.112076. 
[23] Heller, L., Glos, S., Buck, R., 2022. Techno-economic selection and initial 
evaluation of supercritical CO2 cycles for particle technology-based concentrating 
solar power plants. Renew. Energy 181, 833–842. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
renene.2021.09.007. 
[24] Hu, Y.-Z., Ma, T.-B., Wang, H., 2013. Energy dissipation in atomic-scale friction. 
Friction 1 (1), 24–40. 
[25] Huq, M.Z., Celis, J.P., 1997. Reproducibility of friction and wear results in ball-on- 
disc unidirectional sliding tests of TiN-alumina pairings. Wear 212 (2), 151–159. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1648(97)00167-1. 
[26] Huq, M.Z., Celis, J.P., 2002. Expressing wear rate in sliding contacts based on 
dissipated energy. Wear 252 (5), 375–383. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0043-1648 
(01)00867-5. 
[27] Imran Khan, M., Asfand, F., Al-Ghamdi, S.G., 2023. Progress in research and 
technological advancements of commercial concentrated solar thermal power 
plants. Sol. Energy 249, 183–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2022.10.041. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     


===== Page 14 =====

Solar Energy 262 (2023) 111842
14
[28] Khosa, A.A., Xu, T., Xia, B.Q., Yan, J., Zhao, C.Y., 2019. Technological challenges 
and industrial applications of CaCO3/CaO based thermal energy storage system – A 
review. Sol. Energy 193, 618–636. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2019.10.003. 
[29] Lawn, B.R., Swain, M.V., 1975. Microfracture beneath point indentations in brittle 
solids. J. Mater. Sci. 10 (1), 113–122. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00541038. 
[30] Li, B., Li, Y., Dou, Y., Wang, Y., Zhao, J., Wang, T., 2021. SiC/Mn co-doped CaO 
pellets with enhanced optical and thermal properties for calcium looping 
thermochemical heat storage. Chem. Eng. J. 423, 130305 https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.cej.2021.130305. 
[31] Liu, F., Song, C., Zhu, D., Li, C., Ai, L., Xin, C., Zeng, X., Zeng, L., Huang, N., 
Yang, L., 2023. Attrition and attrition-resistance of oxygen carrier in chemical 
looping process – A comprehensive review. Fuel 333, 126304. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.fuel.2022.126304. 
[32] Mahroug, I., Doppiu, S., Dauvergne, J.-L., Palomo del Barrio, E., 2022. Li4(OH) 
3Br/MgO shape stabilized composite as novel high temperature thermal energy 
storage material. J. Storage Mater. 52, 104921 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
est.2022.104921. 
[33] Mohrbacher, H., Celis, J.P., Roos, J.R., 1995. Laboratory testing of displacement 
and load induced fretting. Tribol. Int. 28 (5), 269–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
0301-679X(95)00005-O. 
[34] Moya, J., Marug´an, J., Orfila, M., Díaz-P´erez, M.A., Serrano-Ruiz, J.C., 2021. 
Improved thermochemical energy storage behavior of manganese oxide by 
molybdenum doping. Molecules 26 (3), 583. 
[35] Pardo, P., Deydier, A., Anxionnaz-Minvielle, Z., Roug´e, S., Cabassud, M., 
Cognet, P., 2014. A review on high temperature thermochemical heat energy 
storage. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 32, 591–610. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
rser.2013.12.014. 
[36] Peterson, S.B., Konya, G., Clayton, C.K., Lewis, R.J., Wilde, B.R., Eyring, E.M., 
Whitty, K.J., 2013. Characteristics and CLOU performance of a novel SiO2- 
supported oxygen carrier prepared from CuO and β-SiC. Energy Fuel 27 (10), 
6040–6047. https://doi.org/10.1021/ef401365h. 
[37] Ping, X., Jianjun, Z., Yunlong, A., Wen, H., Bingliang, L., Weihua, C., 2019. 
Vacuum sintering and performance of SiC doped WC-10Ni cemented carbide. Rare 
Metal Mater. Eng. 48 (2), 566–572. 
[38] Powell, M.S., Weerasekara, N.S., Cole, S., LaRoche, R.D., Favier, J., 2011. DEM 
modelling of liner evolution and its influence on grinding rate in ball mills. Miner. 
Eng. 24 (3), 341–351. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mineng.2010.12.012. 
[39] Preisner, N.C., Block, T., Linder, M., Leion, H., 2018. Stabilizing particles of 
manganese-iron oxide with additives for thermochemical energy storage. Energ. 
Technol. 6 (11), 2154–2165. https://doi.org/10.1002/ente.201800211. 
[40] Project, S., 2011. Thermochemical heat storage for concentrated solar power. 
United States. 
[41] Schrader, A.J., Schieber, G.L., Ambrosini, A., Loutzenhiser, P.G., 2020. 
Experimental demonstration of a 5 kWth granular-flow reactor for solar 
thermochemical energy storage with aluminum-doped calcium manganite 
particles. Appl. Therm. Eng. 173, 115257 https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
applthermaleng.2020.115257. 
[42] Sunku Prasad, J., Muthukumar, P., Desai, F., Basu, D.N., Rahman, M.M., 2019. 
A critical review of high-temperature reversible thermochemical energy storage 
systems. Appl. Energy 254, 113733. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
apenergy.2019.113733. 
[43] Thommes, M., Kleinebudde, P., 2017. The science and practice of extrusion- 
spheronization. In: Rajabi-Siahboomi, A.R. (Ed.), Multiparticulate Drug Delivery: 
Formulation, Processing and Manufacturing. Springer, New York, New York, NY, 
pp. 37–63. 
[44] Wang, B., Wang, Z., Dou, B., Ma, Y., Liang, Y., 2021. Effects of TiO2 doping on the 
performance of thermochemical energy storage based on Mn2O3/Mn3O4 redox 
materials. RSC Adv. 11 (53), 33744–33758. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
D1RA05472D. 
[45] Wang, N., Lu, H., Xu, J., Guo, X., Liu, H., 2019. Granular flows of binary mixtures 
down an inclined channel. Int. J. Multiph. Flow 120, 103097. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2019.103097. 
[46] Wokon, M., Block, T., Nicolai, S., Linder, M., Schmücker, M., 2017. 
Thermodynamic and kinetic investigation of a technical grade manganese-iron 
binary oxide for thermochemical energy storage. Sol. Energy 153, 471–485. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2017.05.045. 
[47] Wokon, M., Kohzer, A., Linder, M., 2017. Investigations on thermochemical energy 
storage based on technical grade manganese-iron oxide in a lab-scale packed bed 
reactor. Sol. Energy 153, 200–214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
solener.2017.05.034. 
[48] Wong, B., Brown, L., Schaube, F., Tamme, R., Sattler, C., 2010. Oxide Based 
Thermochemical Heat Storage. SolarPACES, Perpignan, France.  
[49] Xiang, D., Gu, C., Xu, H., Xiao, G., 2021. Self-Assembled Structure Evolution of Mn 
Fe Oxides for High Temperature Thermochemical Energy Storage. Small 17 (29), 
2101524. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.202101524. 
[50] Xiao, G., Grace, J.R., Lim, C.J., 2011. Attrition characteristics and mechanisms for 
limestone particles in an air-jet apparatus. Powder Technol. 207 (1), 183–191. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.powtec.2010.10.028. 
[51] Yarrington, J.D., Bagepalli, M.V., Pathikonda, G., Schrader, A.J., Zhang, Z.M., 
Ranjan, D., Loutzenhiser, P.G., 2021. Numerical analyses of high temperature 
dense, granular flows coupled to high temperature flow property measurements for 
solar thermal energy storage. Sol. Energy 213, 350–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.solener.2020.10.085. 
[52] Yilmaz, D., Darwish, E., Leion, H., 2020. Investigation of the combined Mn-Si oxide 
system for thermochemical energy storage applications. J. Storage Mater. 28, 
101180 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.est.2019.101180. 
D. Gan et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
